Title: 2607.14761v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.14761v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Jul 2026 00:56:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
Motion -Based Beamshape Recovery Enables Precision Nanoparticle Sizing 

D-Dré K.J.M.J . Braam 1,2 , Daan Wolters 1, Matz Liebel 1,*       

> 1Department of Physics and Astronomy, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1100 , Amsterdam, 1081
> HZ, The Netherlands
> 2Present address: Faculty of Medical Sciences, Radboud University, Geert Grooteplein Noord 21, Nijmegen,
> 6525 EZ, The Netherlands
> * email: m.liebel@vu.nl

Abstract 

Label -free all -optical nanosizing approaches based on i nterferometric or darkfield -imaging infer size, 

composition, or shape from single -particle scattering signals, but these signals are inseparably coupled 

to the spatially non -uniform illumination profile of the imaging system. Existing normalisation 

strategies require directly measuring this illumination field , an approach that fails for background -free 

geometries, such as lightsheet -type illumination, where the field cannot be detected. Here we 

introduce a self -normalisation method that reconstructs the illumination profile directly from the 

scattering signals o f many freely diffusing nanoparticles, requiring no additional hardware, calibration 

samples, or direct field measurement. Critically, our approach eliminates the particle -heterogeneity 

bias that otherwise corrupts such reconstructions, by normalising sing le -particle trajectories against 

each other in regions of spatial overlap, where distinct particles necessarily sample identical 

illumination and detection conditions. We validate this method for gold nanoparticles of various size 

in two - and three -dimensional geometries, including a 90° side -illumination configuration in which the 

illumination field is entirely undetectable by conventional means, and show that reconstructed profiles 

closely match ground -truth measurements, thus drastically reducing signal variability. Relying solely 

on the scattering signal already acquired for sizing, our approach is immediately compatible with 

existing interferometric and darkfield nanoscopy platforms and broadly extendable to other scattering 

or fluorescen t modalities, including light -sheet microscopy. INTRODUCTION 

Methods for the label -free sizing and characterisation of nanomaterials are highly relevant across 

many disciplines. High -tech solutions such as cryo electron microscopy or analytical ultracentrifugation 

provide impressive results but come at a considerable price tag combined with low -throughput 1.

Optical alternatives such as dynamic light scattering or nanoparticle (NP) tracking analysis are much 

cheaper and compatible with high -throughput screening but compromise on characterisation accuracy 

and precision 2,3 . All -optical interferometric , or holographic, single particle microscopes, such as 

interferometric scattering microscopy , sometimes referred to as mass photometry ,4 or off -axis 

holograph y5–7 promise better solutions by retaining the cost and throughput advantage while 

improving accuracy and precision. Several solutions have already entered the nanosizing market 

targeting surface based ultrasensitive single -protein characterisation ( Refeyn TwoMP ) and free -flow 

nanocharacterisation ( Bruker iNTApharma ). In the context of nanosizing, a crucial metric is sizing 

precision. A highly precise instrument could be used to in -situ study antigen -antibody interactions or 

distinguish accurately loaded viral delivery systems from those with partially damaged nucleic a cid 

load. Achieving this ambitious goal requires high -quality signal normalisation and correction schemes, 

an area of intense ongoing research. Illumination geometries, experimental noise, optical transfer 

functions and aberrations are some of the parameters that impact the acquired signals 8–10 . An often 

overlooked parameter is the impact of the spatially non -uniform illumination intensity which is often 

estimated through median backgrounds or differential imaging schemes . These provide good 

approximations as long as straylight that does not originate from the sample plane can be excluded. 

Figure 1a schematically outlines the illumination intensity normalisation challenge that we will be 

addressing in this manuscript by depicting a simplified, minimal -complexity, experiment. Particles of 

interest are illuminated with an illumination field, Eillu . Upon light -matter interaction, the particles 

scatter light , Es, which is then collected and imaged on to a camera. For holographic technologies a 

reference field, Er, interferes with Es at the camera resulting in an image , Iholo , that can be described as 

follows: 

𝐼 ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑜 = 𝐴 𝑠  

> 2

+ 𝐴 𝑟  

> 2

+ 2𝐴 𝑠 𝐴 𝑟 cos [𝛥𝜑 ] (1) 

With As being the amplitude of the scattered electric field, Ar that of the reference field and Δφ the 

phase difference between the two fields. A key challenge is that Eillu exhibits a spatially non -uniform 

amplitude, Aillu . Furthermore, position dependent optical transfer function s (OTF s)11 might impact how 

Es is mapped onto the detector plane. In simple terms, even if all the particles in Figure 1a were 

identical, the signals recorded would differ dramatically. The challenge is thus to recover the correct 

signals by normalising for the spatially dependent Aillu and the OTF. 

For some approaches, such as inline holographies, it is possible to estimate Aillu by, for example, 

acquiring a median background and assuming that parasitic back -reflections are absent. OTF s are often 

assumed to be spatially independent, an assumption that can be justified for small field s of view. In 

the context of ultimate sizing precising, both assumptions become increasingly difficult to meet . Other 

schemes relying on off -axis holograph ic or darkfield imaging bring additional challenges as they allow 

arbitrary illumination geometries . Figure 1b shows the example of a background -free side -illumination 

configuration that we favour in off -axis implementations. In such a case, estimating Aillu is highly non -trivial as the illumination light is not entering the detection , the main reason why this approach yields 

excellent background suppression .

Ultimately, sizing accuracy and precision are directly correlated with the normalisation quality ( Figure 

1c ). A n approach that intrinsically accounts for the spatially dependent OTF and Aillu , irrespective of 

parasitic back -reflections and illumination geometries would be highly desirable. In this manuscript, 

we propose a n easy to implement self -normalisation scheme that uses the same quantity that is of 

central interest in nanosizing: light scattering by single NPs which makes our approach highly 

compatible with all existing implementations of interferometric and darkfield -based nanoscopy .

The manuscript is organised as follows. We will first provide a thorough discussion of the normalisation 

problem and then describe our normalisation approach using an intuitive sample geometry comprising 

immobilised NPs in transmission illumination . We will then demonstrate that intrinsic particle size 

heterogeneity needs to be eliminated to allow satisfactory normalisation . We will explain how this can 

be achieved even though nanomaterials are essentially always heterogeneous . We will then extend 

our approach to freely moving particles in 3D volumes. Finally, we will provide several validation 

experiments to showcase our approach , explicitly highlighting its performance in cases where it is 

impossible to directly measure the illumination field.                         

> Figure 1, The signal normalisation challenge in interferometric nanoscopy .a) A simplified holographic sizing
> experiment assuming identical NPs .Even though the sample is monodisperse, the collected scattering signals ,
> Es,exhibit significant variability. This is due to two factors: the spatially non -uniform illumination ,Eillu ,and the
> system's spatially dependent o ptical transfer function (OTF) .b) Example of an illumination geometry that makes
> retrieving Eillu highly non -trivial. c) Achieving the best -possible normalisation is key to solving contemporary and
> future nanosizing challenges.
> RESULTS

The challenge of any scattering -based nanosizing technology is to extract As from the measurement 

and convert it into a quantity that directly reports on the size or mass of the analytes of interest. 

Consulting the general signal ( Equation 1 ) we first need to eliminate  𝐴 𝑟  

> 2

which can be achieved by, for 

example, acquiring a median background: 

𝐼 ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑛 = 𝐴 𝑠  

> 2

+ 2𝐴 𝑠 𝐴 𝑟 cos [𝛥𝜑 ] (2)

Off -axis holography directly extracts  𝐴 𝑠 𝐴 𝑟 𝑒𝑥𝑝 [−𝑖𝛥𝜑 ] via standard hologram processing, thus 

eliminating  𝐴 𝑠  

> 2

and  𝐴 𝑟 

> 2

.7 For i nline holography we assume operation in the  𝐴 𝑠  

> 2

≪ 𝐴 𝑠 𝐴 𝑟  range , a regime that is met during most biological or biomedical applications 12 –14 , to simplify the discussion . We are 

thus left with :

𝐼 𝑂𝐴 _𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 = 𝐴 𝑠 𝐴 𝑟 𝑒𝑥𝑝 [−𝑖𝛥𝜑 ] (3) 

for off -axis holography and, 

𝐼 𝐼𝐿 _𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 ≈ 𝐴 𝑠 𝐴 𝑟 𝑐𝑜𝑠 [𝛥𝜑 ] (4) 

for inline holograph ies 7. Irrespective of the approach AsAr can be extracted either from the complex 

field or by strict focus -control and assuming the absence of field curvature to eliminate the impact of 

𝑐𝑜𝑠 [𝛥𝜑 ] from Equation 4 . If necessary, Ar can be recovered as the square -root of the measured  𝐴 𝑟 

> 2

through the median -background approach mentioned above. 

In mathematical form, w e express As as a function of particle, illumination and system properties by 

using the spatially dependent OTF and Aillu as well as the particle’s scattering cross section , 𝜎 𝑁𝑃 :

𝐴 𝑠 ~𝐴 𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑢 (𝑥 , 𝑦 , 𝑧 )𝑂𝑇𝐹 (𝑥 , 𝑦 , 𝑧 )𝜎 𝑁𝑃  (5) 

Assuming Rayleigh scattering in vacuum we can express Equation 5 as a function of particle diameter, 

d, and the particle refractive index , nNP :

𝐴 𝑠 = 𝑎𝐴 𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑢 (𝑥 , 𝑦 , 𝑧 )𝑂𝑇𝐹 (𝑥 , 𝑦 , 𝑧 ) (𝑛 𝑁𝑃   

> 2−1
> 𝑛 𝑁𝑃
> 2+2

) 𝑑 3 (6)

The constant a describes sample position independent system parameters such as, for example, 

quantum efficiencies or reflection losses . To accurately and precisely size a NP it is thus necessary to 

separate the parameters of interest from the nominally unknown variables: 

(𝑛 𝑁𝑃   

> 2−1
> 𝑛 𝑁𝑃
> 2+2

) 𝑑 3 = 𝐼 𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙  

> 𝑎𝐴 𝑟 (𝑥 ,𝑦 ,𝑧 )𝐴 𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑢 (𝑥 ,𝑦 ,𝑧 )𝑂𝑇𝐹 (𝑥 ,𝑦 ,𝑧 )

(7) 

With  𝐼 𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙  being either  𝐼 𝑂𝐴 _𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙  or  𝐼 𝐼𝐿 _𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 .

Equation 7 suggests a conceptually straight -forward normalisation route. Systematically moving NPs 

of known size and refractive index , such as reference materials composed of Au, SiO 2 or polystyrene, 

across the image and then using their spatially depending signal to eliminate all unknown parameters. 

The difficulty associated with implementing this strategy is the fact that NPs are generally not all of 

equal size . The mean size of a particle suspension might be known but it is often impossible to know 

the size of an individual particle under observation . Using spatially dependent scattering signals, from 

many different single particles, to infer an illumination profile is thus problematic. To demonstrate this 

problem, we recorded multiple images of 80 nm Au NPs on glass using an off -axis holographic 

microscope operated in darkfield configuration ( Methods ). Figure 2a shows the summed image 

including colour -coded scattering signals. The scattering signals suggest a near -random illumination 

profile even though we used near -Gaussian illumination centred in the image , as measured 

independently by removing the darkfield stop (Methods ). Figure 2, Scattering signals can be used for self -normalisation, if implemented correctly. a) Experimentally                  

> obtained scattering amplitudes of many individual Au NPs with a mean diameter of 80 nm. Approximately 100
> individual holograms are summed (grayscale), the coloured circles show the recovered particle signal. b) To
> overcome problems with particle heterogeneity, one could envision systematically scanning a single particle
> across the entire fie ld of view .c) As a) but obtained by systematically scanning a single 60 nm Au NP across the
> image .d)Histogram sof the signal recorded for the single NP shown in c) comparing unnormalised , raw, signals
> (yellow) to those obtained by normalising the single NP raw signal sto an illumination profile obtained by fitting
> the scatter plots shown in a,c) to the sum of a Gaussian and a square Gaussian. Only the illumination profile
> obtained by fitting the single -particle measurement yields satisfactory normalisation results (blue).

To eliminate the problem of particle heterogeneity, we implemented a method relyi ng on observing 

the same single 60 nm diameter NP multiple times while systematically scanning it across the field of 

observation ( Figure 2b ). Following this approach, we recover ed a signal distribution reminiscent of a 

Gaussian illumination beam ( Figure 2c ). To gauge how well signal normalisations based on the two 

distinct approaches perform , we fitted the spatially dependent scattering signals (Figure 2a, c ) to the 

sum of a Gaussian and a square Gaussian . We then divided the scattering signals of the single NP by 

the respective amplitude profiles in an attempt to eliminate scattering signal uncertainty associated 

with particle heterogeneity. Figure 2d shows that the normalisation profile obtained via the single -

particle approach yields much better signal normalisation as compared to the ensemble -

measurement -based estimate even though the underlying data of all three histograms stems from the 

same single NP measurements. 

In other words, even in its simplified implementation where we approximated the product of OTF , Ar

and Aillu as the sum of a Gaussian and a square Gaussian , we were able to demonstrate that successful 

normalisation is possible but requires an approach that eliminates NP heterogeneity . An additional 

aspect is that we were re quire d to systematically scan a single particle across the image which is 

impractical and cumbersome. The method also implicitly relies on immobilised particles , but many 

experimental implementations of modern particle sizing target freely diffusing particles to 

simultaneously measure scattering amplitudes and hydrodynamic radii 15 –17 . For these experiments, 

systematic particle scanning is simply not feasible . Additionally, many particles are typically 

simultaneously present in a given field of view. Figure 3, Implementation of m otion -based beamshape recovery . a) The trajectories of 60 nm Au NPs (coloured   

> dots) show particle -specific mean scattering amplitudes but the position -dependent scattering resembles the
> separately measured beam profile (grayscale image). Individual trajectories are highlighted by area -illustrations
> (dotted lines). b) Schematic of the proposed approach for scattering cross -section heterogeneity immune self -
> normalisation based on spatial overlap of single -particle trajectories . c) 26 randomly chosen trajectories (left)
> recorded for a suspension containing 40 nm and 60 nm diameter Au NPs can be self -normalised into a continuous
> scattering profile (centre). Selecting a larger number (N=433) of trajectories recovers the nominal il lumination
> profile as the product of illumination and reference field amplitude.

To overcome these limitations we propose an extension of the scanning method which is conceptually 

outlined in Figure 3 . Rather than scanning a particle, we follow the trajectories of many single NPs as 

they diffuse through the field of observation. Particle -dependent differences in scattering amplitudes 

are apparent , as indicated by the strongly scattering trajectory overlaying with the we akly scattering 

trajectory in the centre of the same illumination area (Figure 3a ). However, on a trajectory -by -

trajectory basis , the single -particle signals report on the independently measured product of 

illumination and reference wave ( Figure 3a , grayscale ). In other words, a single trajectory could be 

used for normalisation , conceptually very similar to manual particle scanning. However, random 

motion is unlikely to adequately sample the entire field of observation. What is needed is a 

normalisation approach that uses multiple trajectories of different NPs , to cover the entire area, but is 

simultaneously insensitive to particle heterogeneity. Toward this goal, we propose a scheme that self -

normalises the scattering amplitudes of single particles within their respective 3D spatial trajectories 

with respect to each other using spatial overlaps as regions where both particles report on identical 

illumination intensities .

Figure 3b schematically explains the idea, using a simulation of three particles diffusing across a one -

dimensional Gaussian beam profile. The particles exhibit different scattering amplitudes which means 

that a direct signal -mean would fail to recover the beam profile ( Figure 3b, left ), the experimental 

heterogeneity problem already observed in Figure 2 . To eliminate this issue, we propose to normalise 

the signals of the individual particles with respect to each other, using mean scattering signals 

computed in areas of spatial overlap. The rationale is simple : in the absence of heterogeneity , position -

dependent signals would be solely a function of Aillu Ar and the OTF. If two particles are in close spatial 

proximity they sample identical Aillu Ar and the OTF and a self -normalisation of the particles ’ entire trajectory based on this overlapping region therefore eliminates size and composition differences. 

Figure 3b shows that this approach is indeed able to recover the simulated beam profile. 

Figure 3c implements the same normalisation in two dimensions, using experimentally measured 

trajectories for a mixture of 40 nm and 60 nm diameter Au NPs (Methods ). A set of 26 randomly chosen 

trajectories shows widely varying scattering signals albeit slightly increased amplitudes towards the 

centre of the image. We then attempted self -normalisation following a simple strategy ( Methods ): We 

first quantise d the particle positions onto a 1x1 μm two -dimensional grid and identified the two 

trajectories with the maximum number of position overlaps. We then normalise d the se two 

trajectories using the mean of their respective scattering signals in the overlapping region followed by 

combin ing them into a new, longer, trajectory. We then repeat ed this process until all trajectories were 

combined into one single spatial network covering the entire area of observation. As can be seen, even 

26 trajectories already deliver a scattering signal reminiscent of an illumination profile , a marked 

improvement over the near -random signals ( Figure 3c ). After incorporating the entire dataset , we 

indeed recover ed a profile that closely resembles an expected illumination profile multiplied with a 

uniform reference wave (Figure 3c ).               

> Figure 4, Benchmarking and application. a) Hydrodynamic diameter vs cube -root of scattering amplitude plots
> for individually measured 40 nm (yellow) and 60 nm (blue) diameter Au NPs. Comparisons of results obtained
> for unnormali sed (left) ,normalised to directly measured (centre) or trajectory -based reconstructed (right)
> illumination beam profiles are shown .b) Quantification of signal variations within individual trajectories of
> diameter 60 nm Au NPs as a measure of normalisation -quality. The histogram shows deviations from the mean
> value of individual 800 -point trajectories. 80 adjacent trajectory points are av eraged to eliminate shot -noise
> contributions thus yielding 10 histogram bins per trajectory . c) Representative single -particle amplitudes
> obtained for individual trajectories comparing as recorded and beamshape -normalised results of trajectories
> sampling beam -areas of minor variation (left) and drastic changes (right). d) 3D beamshape normalisation
> applied to an “invisible” illumination beam based on 90 °side -illumination showing the reconstructed xyz -
> projections (top) as well as trajectory mean normalised scattering amplitudes without (centre) and with (bottom)
> illumination amplitude normalisation at varying z -distances from the image plane. 8 adjacent trajectory time -
> poi nts were averaged to reduce shot -noise induced distribution broadening.

At this point, the key question is whether the recovered normalisation profile correct ly reflects reality .

Answering this question is non -trivial as the intrinsic p article heterogeneity makes it difficult to provide 

a ground -truth measurement. Toward this goal, w e attempted various strategies, as outlined in Figure 

4. Initially, we compared scattering -based recovery with direct measurements of Aillu Ar, by using a 

transmission -based darkfield setup where removing the mask allowed a direct measurement of the latter (Methods ). This approach yields a somewhat accurate ground -truth estimation even though we 

noted that OTF -contributions lead to minor discrepancies 11 , an aspect we attribute to the fact that an 

illumination field measurement only reports on the low -k contributions to the OTF, and the difficulties 

associated with perfectly positioning a darkfield mask in the Fourier plane .

Figure 4 summarises the validation attempts which provide strong supporting evidence for the broad 

applicability and robustness of our method . Figure 4a compare s the hydrodynamic radi i and scattering 

amplitude s of measurements conducted on 40 nm and 60 nm diameter Au nanoparticles ( Methods ). 

The unnormali sed data shows a considerable signal spread which is reduced when normalising to 

either the directly measured or recovered illumination profile. Importantly, the two approaches yield 

near -identical results , and the normalisation profiles closely resemble each other even though they 

were obtained following distinctly different routes. In simple terms, the experimentally measured 

illumination beam shape is near -identical to the beam shape reconstructed via merged particle 

trajectories. In a second approach, we evaluate d the spatially dependent mean scattering amplitude 

for single particles based on a trajectory -by -trajectory analysis for 60 nm Au nanoparticles ( Figure 4b, 

Methods ). Our underlying assumption is that the scattering signal of a single particle should be 

constant, if correctly normalised, and that normalisation artefacts are likely to manifest themselves as 

spatially distinct patterns. Figure 4b compares single -particle scattering signals, normalised to the 

mean signal of the ir corresponding trajectory, for illumination -profile -normalised and as -recorded 

signals. The dramatic reduction in histogram -spread suggests successful normalisation . To support this 

conclusion, Figure 4c shows a few representative single -particle scattering signals over a total of 800 

trajectory points. For particles that remain spatially localised within somewhat uniform illumination 

areas ( Figure 4c ) we observe near -identical normalised and raw signals. When moving towards 

particles that explore areas of dramatically changing illumination amplitudes, our normalisation 

procedure recovers normalised signal -fluctuations reminiscent of uniform illumination amplitudes ,

thus further underlining the high -quality normalisation achieved. 

Thus far, we have focused on normalisations in 2D space, employing an experimental configuration 

that allowed physically inspecting the illumination field. To demonstrate the broad applicability of our 

methods, we conclude with an experiment conducted under 90 ° illumination where the illumination 

field is undetected ( Methods ), as outlined in Figure 1b . Figure 4d shows xyz -projections of the 

reconstructed illumination field , which indicates that scattering -based 3D reconstruction might be 

feasible. To test this hypothesis, we relied on single particle observations, justified by the same 

assumption that individual particles exhibit constant , position independent, scattering cross sections. 

Comparing the trajectory -mean normalised scattering amplitudes with and without illumination 

amplitude normalisation (Figure 4d ) highlights that it is, indeed, possible to accurately reconstruct the 

illumination profile based on many individually recorded single -particle trajectories despite the 

intrinsic particle heterogeneity. The minor deviations in the -20 to -10 μm z -range are likely due to the 

very low particle counts that negatively impacted the reconstruction quality. 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 

To summarise, we proposed, implemented and validated a methodology that accurately and precisely 

reconstructs an illumination profile by relying on many single -particle trajectories enabled by 

stochastic sampling via Brownian motion. At its core, the method eliminates the intrinsic self -

normalisation bias, due to particle heterogeneity, through the simple realisation that enforcing 

identical scattering signals for distinct particles in spatially overlapping regions essentially makes th eparticles identical. Repeating this self -normalisation procedure over many overlapping regions and 

many single particle trajectories then covers a large 3D volume that would be, otherwise, impossible 

to sample with a single particle. 

We demonstrated our strategy and the problem of particle heterogeneity through serial singl e- and 

multiple -particle measurements by manually scanning a 2D surface ( Figure 2 ) before showcasing how 

the intrinsic motion of freely diffusing particles enables the same strategy ( Figure 3 ). We then validate d

our approach through intrinsically more complex scenarios covering beamshape recovery, trajectory 

self -normalisation and, ultimately, 3D illumination field recovery of an unobserved beam as well as 

scattering -signal normalisation (Figure 4 ). Our results provide a much -needed signal normalisation 

framework that is broadly applicable and highly relevant for nanosizing applications and readily 

translatable to other modalities, such as light -sheet microscopy, if quantitative signals are of interest. 

Beyond normalisation, our approach enables accurate and precise spatially -dependent imaging system 

characterisation, including OTF contributions, based on optical signals that are equivalent to potential 

analytes of interest. The framework introduced here represents a crucial step towards realising 

ultrasensitive flow -cytometry based on interferometric imaging rather than darkfield -type point 

observations .

METHODS 

Microscope , holographic imaging and data processing 

Data was acquired using a conventional off -axis real -space holographic microscope 15 based on either 

a 520 nm ( PD -01298 , Lasertack GmbH ; all diffusion measurements ) or a 635 nm single -mode diode 

laser (PD -01287, Lasertack GmbH ; static particles ), using numerical aperture 0.5 ( RMS20X -PF , Nikon )

or 0.75 ( RMS40X -PF , Nikon ) Nikon Plan Fluor objectives in combination with a 200 mm tube lens and 

a Basler dart daA1440 -220um camera as detector . The probe -to -reference time -delay was adjusted 

based on a manual translation stage by maximising the amplitude of the interferometric signal. All data 

pre -processing was conducted as discussed in detail elsewhere 15,16 . Depending on the experiment, the 

sample was either illuminated in a transmission geometry , with a removable darkfield stop positioned 

in the centre of the objective’s back -focal -plane, or in a side -illumination configuration, under a 90 °

angle with respect to the collection objective. 

Sample preparation 

#1.5H cover glass was sonicated for 10 min in acetone and 10 min in miliQ followed by drying under a 

stream of nitrogen and then used for the assembly of sample chambers. 

The transmission -chambers consisted of two cover glasses separated by ~400 μm with double -sided 

sticky tape that were filled with the analyte of interest: 40 nm, 60 nm and 80 nm Au NPs ( BBI Solutions )

diluted to imaging -appropriate concentrations (100 -10000 fold dilution of the original OD = 1 

suspensions, depending on the experiment ).

The side -illumination cells consisted of a single cover glass with two polished fused silica pieces (1x1x8 

mm, Hylasercutting ), separated by approximately 4 mm, acting as in -coupling and out -coupling 

windows into the NP suspensions contained between the windows . The pieces were attach ed to the 

cover glass using an oxygen -plasma activated 50 μm silicone film that had a hole punched into the centre to ensure that the collected signal directly propagated from the liquid environment into the 

cover glass without passing the silicone layer .

For the experiments with static particles, we relied on binding via PLL -gPEG , as outlined previously 18 ,

or the addition of NaCl to induce particle aggregation. 

Data processing 

The extracted interference terms were expanded into a coarse z -stack using the angular spectrum 

method followed by particle detection based on a YOLOv8 model trained on a full -physics simulation 

of the holographic image formation process. Based on the size of the YOLOv8 boxes we inferred a first, 

coarse, z -position which was then used to obtain near in -focus NPs from the original interference 

information. The NPs were extracted, cropping an area of approximately 10 -times the optical 

diffraction limited followed by multiple rounds of fine -propagation to focus the particle. The 

numerically obtained z -position yielding the maximum signal -amplitude was used as the true z -

position of the particle. The xy -positions were coarsel y estimated using an established radial symmetry 

approach 19 . The particle amplitude was extracted as the maximum of a dramatically resolution -

enhanced (k -space padding) particle image . Trajectory linking was based on the Python trackpy v0.7 

package 20 .

Beamshape recovery 

To recover the illumination profile from the single -particle trajectories discussed in Figure 3 we relied 

on 2D position -projections to computationally simplify the retrieval process. We quantised the 

xy/xz/yz -positions using a 1 μm spatial grid and then computed the number of overlapping trajectory 

points for arbitrar il y selected trajectories. If two trajectories overlapped by more than 70 positions ,

we merged all positions of the two trajectories into a new “trajectory”. The amplitudes of both initial 

trajectories were normalised with respect to each other using amplitude means obtained from the 

overlapping data points. This process was repeated until all trajectories were merged into one 

trajectory or until a certain number of iterations was exceeded to account for non -overlapping 

trajectories that were discarded. We repeated the steps outlined above multiple times to ensure 

consistent reconstruction despite the arbitrary selection of trajectories. The 3D beamshape recovery 

discussed in Figure 4 followed the same, 2D projection -based, strategy which was extended by a 3D 

interpolation procedure to reconstruct the final volumetric representation. 

REFERENCES                          

> 1. Werle, A. K. et al. Comparison of analytical techniques to quantitate the capsid content of adeno -associated
> viral vectors. Mol. Ther. -Methods Clin. Dev. 23 , 254 –262 (2021).
> 2. Bachurski, D. et al. Extracellular vesicle measurements with nanoparticle tracking analysis –An accuracy and
> repeatability comparison between NanoSight NS300 and ZetaView. J. Extracell. Vesicles 8, 1596016 (2019).
> 3. Hoo, C. M., Starostin, N., West, P. & Mecartney, M. L. A comparison of atomic force microscopy (AFM) and
> dynamic light scattering (DLS) methods to characterize nanoparticle size distributions. J. Nanoparticle Res. 10 ,
> 89 –96 (2008).
> 4. Ginsberg, N. S., Hsieh, C. -L., Kukura, P., Piliarik, M. & Sandoghdar, V. Interferometric scattering microscopy.
> Nat. Rev. Methods Primer 5, 23 (2025).
> 5. Kreis, T. Digital holographic interference -phase measurement using the Fourier -transform method. J Opt Soc
> Am A 3, 847 –588 (1986).
> 6. Schnars, U. & Jüptner, W. Direct recording of holograms by a CCD target and numerical reconstruction. Appl.
> Opt. 33 , 179 –181 (1994).

7. Cuche, E., Marquet, P. & Depeursinge, C. Spatial filtering for zero -order and twin -image elimination in digital 

off -axis holography. Appl. Opt. 39 , 4070 –4075 (2000). 

8. Brooks, N. J., Liu, C. -C., Chen, Y. -H. & Hsieh, C. -L. Point Spread Function Engineering for Spiral Phase 

Interferometric Scattering Microscopy Enables Robust 3D Single -Particle Tracking and Characterization. ACS 

Photonics 11 , 5239 –5250 (2024). 

9. Lombardo, C. et al. Leveraging Partial Coherence to Enhance Nanoparticle Detection Sensitivity and 

Throughput in Interferometric Scattering Microscopy. ACS Photonics 12 , 4376 –4387 (2025). 

10. Mazaheri, M. et al. iSCAT microscopy and particle tracking with tailored spatial coherence. Optica 11 , 1030 

(2024). 

11. Juvells, I., Vallmitjana, S., Ros, D. & Moneo, J. R. de F. Numerical evaluation of the two -dimensional modulation 

transfer function by means of spot diagram. Comparison with experimental measurements. J. Opt. 14 , 293 

(1983). 

12. Piliarik, M. & Sandoghdar, V. Direct optical sensing of single unlabelled proteins and super -resolution imaging 

of their binding sites. Nat. Commun. 5, 4495 (2014). 

13. Young, G. et al. Quantitative mass imaging of single biological macromolecules. Science 360 , 423 –427 (2018). 

14. Liebel, M., Hugall, J. T. & van Hulst, N. F. Ultrasensitive Label -Free Nanosensing and High -Speed Tracking of 

Single Proteins. Nano Lett. 17 , 1277 –1281 (2017). 

15. Ortega Arroyo, J. & Liebel, M. The Next Dimension: Digital Holography for 3D Interferometric Scattering. ACS 

Nano 19 , 38630 –38640 (2025). 

16. Ortiz -Orruño, U., Quidant, R., van Hulst, N. F., Liebel, M. & Ortega Arroyo, J. Simultaneous Sizing and Refractive 

Index Analysis of Heterogeneous Nanoparticle Suspensions. ACS Nano 17 , 221 –229 (2023). 

17. Kashkanova, A. D., Blessing, M., Gemeinhardt, A., Soulat, D. & Sandoghdar, V. Precision size and refractive 

index analysis of weakly scattering nanoparticles in polydispersions. Nat. Methods 19 , 586 –593 (2022). 

18. Ortiz -Orruño, U., Jo, A., Lee, H., van Hulst, N. F. & Liebel, M. Precise Nanosizing with High Dynamic Range 

Holography. Nano Lett. 21 , 317 –322 (2021). 

19. Parthasarathy, R. Rapid, accurate particle tracking by calculation of radial symmetry centers. Nat. Methods 9,

724 –726 (2012). 

20. trackpy v0.7. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16089574.