Title: Ultrafast X-Rays Capture Retinal Traversing Conical Intersection in Rhodopsin

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
-1-

# Ultrafast X -Rays Capture Retinal Traversing Conical 

# Intersection in Rhodopsin 

Thomas D. Grant 1,† , Suchithranga M.D.C. Perera 2,† , Leslie A. Salas -Estrada 3,†,‡ , C. Swathi K. 

Menon 2, Andrey V. Struts 2,4 , Xiaolin Xu 5, Steven D. E. Fried 2,§ , Nipuna Weerasinghe 2, Udeep 

Chawla 2, Roberto Alvarez 6, Hao Hu 6, Konstantinos Karpos 6, Stella Lisova 6,¶ , Reza Nazari 6, Sahba 

Zaare 6, Jesse Coe 7, Raimund Fromme 7, Domingo Meza 7, Abhishek Singharoy 7,8 , Sarah R. 

Chamberlain 1, Stephen Moore 1, Nadia A. Zatsepin 6,8,# , Fivos Perakis 9, Sergio Carbajo 10,11,12 , Mark 

S. Hunter 11 , Mengning Liang 11 , Matthew D. Seaberg 11 , Sébastien Boutet 11 , Derek Mendez 6,** ,

Alan Grossfield 3, Petra Fromme 7,8 , Richard A. Kirian 6,8 , & Michael F. Brown 2,5,*  

> 1

Department of Structural Biology, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, SUNY 

University at Buffalo; Buffalo, New York 14203, USA.  

> 2

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Arizona; Tucson, Arizona 85721, 

USA.  

> 3

Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Rochester Medical Center; Rochester, 

New York 14642, USA.  

> 4

Department of Biophysics, Saint Petersburg State Medical University; St. Petersburg 194100, 

Russia.  

> 5

Department of Physics, University of Arizona; Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA.  

> 6

Department of Physics, Arizona State University; Tempe, Arizona 85287, USA.  

> 7

School of Molecular Sciences, Arizona State University; Tempe, Arizona 85281, USA.  

> 8

Biodesign Center for Applied Structural Discovery, Arizona State University; Tempe, Arizona 

85281, USA.  

> 9

Department of Physics, AlbaNova University Center, Stockholm University; SE -10691 

Stockholm, Sweden.  

> 10

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, and Department of Physics and Astronomy, 

University of California; Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.  

> 11

Linac Coherent Light Source, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory; Menlo Park, California 

94025, USA.  

> 12

California NanoSystems Institute, 570 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles; CA 90095, USA.  

> †

These authors contributed equally: Thomas D. Grant, Suchithranga M.D.C. Perera, Leslie A. 

Salas -Estrada.  

> ‡

Present address: Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 

Sinai; New York, NY 10029, USA.  

> §

Present address: Department of Chemistry, Stanford University; Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-2- 

> ¶

Present address: Linac Coherent Light Source, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo 

Park, California 94025, USA.  

> #

Present address: Department of Physics and Astronomy, Swinburne University of Technology, 

Hawthorn, VIC 3122, Australia.  

> **

Present address: Stanford Synchrotron Light Source, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, 

Menlo Park, California 94025, USA. 

* Corresponding author. Email: mfbrown@arizona.edu 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-3-

Abstract: G-protein -coupled receptors of the Rhodopsin family are crucial medicinal targets, 

transmitting signals across biomembranes. While light absorption by visual rhodopsin is well 

studied, its activation via retinal cofactor dynamics remains unclear. Here we use a free -electron 

laser to show that time -resolved X-ray solution scattering captures the retinal cis –trans 

isomerization as it passes the conical intersection of excited and ground -state photoproduct energy 

surfaces . Femtosecond -scale nuclear changes occur due to resonant photon absorption, with all -

atom simulations revealing ultrafast amino acid movements that initiate transmembrane helix 

shifts. Ligand -free opsin measurements confirm that light activation is unaffe cted by non -resonant 

processes, showing the photonic energy is directly transmitted within the protein. Our method 

unveils how cofactor dynamics activate rhodopsin, free of constraints from crystal lattice packing 

or cryotrapping photointermediates. 

Main Text: 

Photoisomerization of the retinal cofactor of animal and microbial rhodopsins is among the 

fastest reactions in biology with a high efficiency and ultrafast dynamics 1,2 . For visual 

rhodopsin —the G -protein -coupled receptor (GPCR) involved in dim -light perception —optical 

spectroscopy 3,4 has shown the primary rhodopsin photoproduct forms within ~200 fs 4-8. Retinal 

isomerization underlies visual signaling 9, ion conduction, and energy transduction by microbial 

(archaeal and bacterial) rhodopsins 10 , and optogenetics applications 11 . Current structural 

information is derived largely from crystallographic approaches 12 -17 , NMR spectroscopy 9, and 

cryogenic electron microscopy 18 combined with machine -learning 19 . Light absorption by retinal 

is followed by excited state decay which takes on average ~90 fs as indicated by quantum chemical 

calculations 1,2 (1 fs = 10 –15 s). From ultrafast absorption 7 and transient -grating 8 measurements 

of rhodopsin, it is postulated the transition state involves a conical intersection (CI) 20 of the excited 

reactant and ground -state photoproduct energy surfaces, yielding isomerization of retinal from 11 -

cis to all -trans in a vibrationally coherent manner (Fig. 1). The theoretical CI point is crucial to 

explaining the dual requirements of low basal (dark -state ) activity together with ultrafast reaction 

dynamics and high efficiency that enable rhodopsin to detect low light levels in scotopic vision. 

With decades of research, the direct structural detection of the sub -picosecond isomerization 

of retinal in real time —the Holy Grail of visual photochemistry —has eluded researchers until now. 

Time -resolved crystal structures have recently become available 15 , yet exploring the sub -

picosecond dynamics at high temporal resolution remains challenging. Furthermore, confinement 

in a crystal lattice can alter biochemical pathways even in serial crystallography 21 . Here we show 

that time -resolved X -ray solution scattering (TR -XSS) with an X -ray free electron laser (XFEL) 

(Fig. 1A) detects the ultrafas t cis –trans isomerization of retinal in real time while passing through 

the CI point for visual rhodopsin. Fleeting atomic motions during barrier crossings are what defines 

chemistry, allowing us to observe a protein in action. Our detection method rests on comparing the 

rhodopsin holoprotein to ligand -free opsin to establish the differences in X -ray scattering that come 

from resonant light absorption by the ret inal chromophore (Fig. 1B). Besides isomerization of 

retinal (Fig. 1C), ultrafast motions of highly conserved amino acid residues occur near the cofactor 

binding pocket as shown by our molecular dynamics simulations. By circumventing crystal lattice 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-4-

packing forces, cryotrapping of photointermediates, and radiation damage to crystalline order, our 

method brings significant advantages to exploring protein dynamics in structural biology. 

Fig. 1. Exploring ultrafast photochemistry of visual rhodopsin with femtosecond X -ray scattering. (A) Sample 

delivery and laser excitation scheme for time -resolved pump -probe studies of rhodopsin solubilized in CHAPS 

detergent micelles at Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS). (B) Sequence of rhodopsin photointermediates from 

optical spectroscopy ranging from fs to ms due to photolysis of the bound retinal chromophore. (C) Electronic energy 

states of visual rhodopsin (PDB accession code: 1U19) 13 described by potential surfaces of retinal cofactor. 

Absorption of a green incident photon yields vertical excitation to an excited state, which relaxes to the conical 

intersection (CI) with the ground -state S0 potential surface 23 . The protein environment channels the excited -state 

energy through the CI yielding the biologically relevant pathway. Note the extracellular side (e -side) of rhodopsin is 

at top and the cytoplasmic side (c -side) at bottom. 

Ultrafast dynamics of visual receptors seen by femtosecond X -ray scattering 

For rhodopsin, we used ultrafast X -ray scattering to investigate the dynamical processes due 

to light absorption in the initial stage of vision, before large -scale protein conformational changes 

occur 10 . This study marks the first femtosecond time -resolved scattering experiment with a GPCR 

such as rhodopsin. The ultrafast XFEL at LCLS allowed us to explore how the functional 

conformational changes of rhodopsin are initiated by dynamic allostery of the retinal ligand. To 

achieve this goal, we developed methods for time -resolved X -ray scattering using an XFEL source. 

Our experiments ensu red that data collection outpaced radiation damage (diffraction before 

destruction) by using ultrafast 40 -fs XFEL pulses. The protocol encompassed optimizing the 

sample delivery system, control apoprotein samples, and all -atom molecular dynamics (MD) 

simul ations with an explicit solvent. 

A B

C

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-5-

Fig. 2. Femtosecond time -resolved X -ray scattering analysis of light -induced rhodopsin structural changes. 

(A) Experimental TR -XSS difference profiles (light –dark; λ=527 nm) for rhodopsin (10 mg mL –1 in 30 mM CHAPS 

detergent) at pH 7.4 and ambient temperature. The TR -XSS profiles are shown as a stack of 1D profiles, colored as a 

heatmap. Each horizontal line corresponds to a single scattering profile at a particular time delay (blue, positive; red, 

ne gative). (B) Corresponding data for retinal -free opsin apoprotein; the color -bar shows difference -scattering intensity 

in units of photons per pixel. (C) Examples of rhodopsin -minus -opsin double -difference profiles for representative 

times from –2 to +10 ps . (D) Singular -value decomposition (SVD) of double -difference profiles reveals two 

significant states. Amplitudes of the first two left -singular vectors ( l-SV) versus time are fitted with a sum of 

exponentials. (E) Closeup for dominant left -singular vector during first two ps shows the most significant state rises 

within the first time point coinciding with 11 -cis to all -trans isomerization of retinal. 

Our aim for rhodopsin was to probe the ultrafast nuclear changes (0 –10 ps) due to photonic 

energy absorption that precede activation of the receptor. We hypothesized that 

photoisomerization of retinal could be detected via X -ray scattering of the protein in a

noncrystalline environment 9. Accordingly, we acquired TR -XSS data of rhodopsin in non -

crystalline environment (CHAPS detergent micelles to follow the protein structural changes near 

ambient temperature (Fig. 1A). In our pump -probe experiment, an ultrafast pulse of visible light 

exc ites rhodopsin molecules flowing in a liquid jet, initially in the dark, nonexcited state. Shortly 

after the pump excitation with an optical parametric amplifier (OPA) (~70 -fs pulse width), the 

probe XFEL pulse (40 -fs width) scatters X -rays from the rhodop sin molecules onto the detector. 

Convolving the Gaussian pulse durations yields ~80 fs as the nominal time resolution. The X -ray 

scattering profiles were collected versus the delay time after excitation, which ranged from –2 ps 

to +10 ps 22 . Use of the LCLS time tool 22 allowed us to reduce the ~300 fs timing uncertainty to 

~50 fs. The averaged laser -off scattering profiles were subtracted from the corresponding laser -on 

profiles to isolate the signal from the photon absorption (materials and methods) (Fig. 2A, B). For 

rhodopsin the TR -XSS data showed a significant difference -scattering signal at q-values less than 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-6-

~0.12 Å –1, whereas the higher q-range had little discernible signal above the noise (Fig. 2A, 3D). 

The light -induced negative difference scattering signal of rhodopsin is readily seen in the 1D 

difference scattering profiles in the low -q range (Fig. 2C). 

Resonant photon absorption as revealed by ligand -free opsin apoprotein 

Crucially, the difference signal for rhodopsin at the low q-values (Fig. 2A) was absent for the 

control opsin apoprotein, which lacks the retinal cofactor (Fig. 2B). Besides light absorption by 

the retinal chromophore, nonresonant absorption by amino acid residues such as tryptophan is 

possible, e.g., as seen with bacteriorhodopsin 23 . To address the question of resonant versus non -

resonant absorption, we prepared retinal -free opsin which is not photochemically active. 

Contributions from absorption by the protein and detergent — i.e., not arising from retinal 

photoabsorption —were measured by collecting an additional dataset for the opsin apoprotein (Fig. 

2B). The opsin difference profiles showed little to no scattering signal across the entire q-range, in 

striking contrast to the rhodopsin holoprotein. Double -difference scattering profiles were 

calculated to remove any small residual signals from nonresonant effects. The TR -XSS data for 

the opsin control prove that the ultrafast changes in the TR -XSS signal originate from resonant 

photon absorption by the retinal cofactor. Such control studies have rarely been conducted with an 

XFEL due to the limited beam -time availability. 

Perhaps most surprising, our results imply the light -induced TR -XSS differences for rhodopsin 

are due to ultrafast (sub -picosecond) cis –trans isomerization of the retinal cofactor . Structural 

detection of retinal isomerization in real time has never been achieved for rhodopsin to our 

knowledge. The crucial opsin control (Fig. 2B) proves that energy transfer from retinal spreads 

throughout the rhodopsin holoprotein. The photonic energy (~54 kcal mol –1) internally converts 

the protein to an energetically favorable state (photorhodopsin ; see below) that transitions downhill 

in the multiscale reaction mechanism (Fig. 1B). Experimentally, increasing the pump (OPA) power 

density deposits excess energy to the surroundings 24 , while maintaining the biological reaction 

pathway 25 . From a biophysics viewpoint, the changes seen in the TR -XSS experiment owe to 

rapid cis to trans isomerization of retinal, causing the protein to evolve on its energy landscape, 

accompanied by greater internal energy of the photointermediates versus the dark state (Fig. 1C). 

Time -ordered reaction sequence in rhodopsin X -ray scattering 

To better understand how the photointermediates yield differences in X -ray scattering, we 

carried out singular -value decomposition (SVD) of the experimental TR -XSS profiles (Fig. 2D, 

E). These profiles were obtained from class averages of scattering image s based on their median 

intensity in a specified q-range (Fig. 3A). Initially, several hundred images were grouped into 100 -

fs time -delay bins (Fig. 3B, C). Based on shot intensities (Fig. 3A), we calculated the opsin minus 

rhodopsin double -difference profiles (Fig. 3D, E). The SVD results —the right singu lar vectors in 

the structural q-space and left singular vectors in the time domain —showed the scattering 

difference was dominated by two components (Fig. 3F). The largest component begins to rise 

within the first time points of the TR -XSS data (~30 fs or ~100 fs bins) (Figs. 2D, 3G), which 

overlaps formation of the primary photoproduct (~90 fs) passing through the CI 2. This state grows 

until a plateau is reached at ~500 fs, which persists until ~4 ps after the optical pulse. Thereafter, 

the dominant component gives way to a second component, rising continually through the last time 

delay at 10 ps, at both 100 -fs (Fig. 2D) and 30 -fs binning (Fig. 3G). The conservative 100 -fs 

binning ensured no information was lost by class -averaging the scattering profiles. The similar left 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-7-

singular vectors binned at 30 fs corroborated the results, despite higher noise levels, approaching 

the time resolution of ultrafast transient -grating studies (Fig. 3H) 8.

Fig 3. Time -resolved X -ray scattering analysis of ultrafast structural changes of rhodopsin compared to ligand -

free opsin. (A) Histogram showing the number of scattering patterns versus the intensity per shot (photons/pixel) in 

the scattering vector range q > 0.3 Å –1 for opsin and rhodopsin. (B, C) Number of shots available for rhodopsin and 

opsin apoprotein experiments (blue) corresponding to each time delay (ps) with 100 -fs binning plotted alongside 

number of shots actually averaged (orange) for analysis. (D) Heatmap shows rhodopsin -minus -opsin double -

difference profiles at 100 -fs binning. (E) Expansion of panel D between the scattering vectors q = 0.06 Å –1 and 0.22 

Å–1. (F) The SVD components obtained when scattering profiles are binned at 30 fs. The f irst ten right -singular 

vectors ( r-SVs) show only two components with significant structure. Inset: first five left -singular vectors ( l-SVs) 

versus time delay, showing only two vectors with scattering features. (G) Expansion of data for first two left -singular 

vectors ( l-SVs) from –2 to +10 ps. (H) Expansion of data for first l-SV is shown for –2 to +2 ps time delays. 

Even though SVD vectors cannot always be assigned to distinct structural states, based on the 

timescale, the first component coincides with bathorhodopsin as the first stable photointermediate 

(<200 fs) (Figs. 2E, 3H). However, transient -grating experiment s suggest the primary 

photoproduct (photorhodopsin) is formed beginning at ~30 fs, whereas the average excited state 

lifetime is ~90 fs for the population 2. For TR -XSS the longer time to complete the initial change 

(<500 fs) is likely because it probes the entire protein and not just the retinal binding pocket (see 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-8-

below). Surprisingly, the first SVD component decays concurrently with appearance of a second 

component (~4 ps) within the optical lifetime for bathorhodopsin (tens of ns) 6. We attribute this 

transition to relaxation of the initial, impulsive structural distortions due to energy dissipation from 

the active site to the protein surface. Hence the second SVD component may represent a thermally 

relaxed state formed by the stabili zation of the protein following the decay of the primary 

photoproduct 6,8 . The remainder of the absorbed light energy must be internally redistributed within 

the protein to account for the time -ordered sequence of photointermediates in visual signaling (Fig. 

1C) 6.

Seeing rhodopsin photochemistry in real time with X -ray scattering 

Accordingly, TR -XSS based on an XFEL (Fig 1A) provides a unique structural window into 

the ultrafast photochemistry central to dim -light vision. Optical spectroscopy (3, 7) and quantum -

mechanical calculations (1, 6, 29) have established that the high quantum yield (0.67) of rhodopsin 

arises from a conical intersection (CI) —a shortcut of the electronic energy between the excited 

rhodopsin (11 -cis ) and ground photorhodopsin (all -trans ) states (cf. Fig. 1C). However, a 

fundamental gap remains in translating this electronic phenomenon into structural reality. For 

rhodopsin a fter photon absorption, the CI point enables a barrierless (non -radiative) cis -to -trans 

isomerization of the retinal cofactor. The nuclear and electronic motions are not separable (due to 

vibronic coupling —failure of the Born -Oppenheimer, BO approximation) leading to the ultrafast 

reaction speed (Fig. 1C). Theoretically, the CI point involves a non -adiabatic singularity where 

elec tronic and nuclear motions become inextricably coupled during photoisomerization 

(nonadiabatic process). The nuclei are viewed as abruptly hopping from the excited to the ground -

state potential (surface crossing) . By contrast, for non -ultrafast processes the nuclear positions 

evolve gradually on a single potential surface (adiabatic theorem), so that adiabatic or BO states 

have an avoided crossing. Hence, the isomerization entails diabatic states and the quantum yie ld 

has been calculated using the Landau -Zener formula 26 .

Notably, the CI point predicts that electronic energy should be instantly converted into nuclear 

motion. Therefore, the specific structural manifestation of this conversion has eluded direct 

observation. Here we show that TR -XSS uniquely bridges this divide between quantum dynamics 

and structural biology. While X -ray scattering does not map the electronic potential energy 

surfaces directly, it provides a time -resolved sampling of the resulting nuclear coordinates. Atomic 

mo tions of retinal constitute the reaction coordinates of C11=C12 bond isomerization, including 

localized ethylenic stretching, hydrogen -out -of -plane (HOOP) wagging, and torsional modes (7, 

18 ). The TR -XSS signal at early times are due to coherent nuclear motions of retinal coupled to 

the protein, which not only survive passage through the CI, but also drive its cis -trans 

isomerization (2, 3, 6, 7 ). Upon vertical photoexcitation (Franck -Condon states), the vibrations on 

either side of the CI lead to molecules passing to the photoproduct side ( all -trans ) (quantum yield 

= 0.67), while the remainder (0.33) simultaneously populates the reactant side (11 -cis ) (called 

recovery of ground -state bleach, RGB). Importantly, the RGB is a signature of vibrational 

coherence —it implies passage through the CI point (7). It is caused by photoexcited but unreactive 

retinal molecules which undergo internal conversion to the vibrationally hot 11 -cis ground state 

(7). Consistent with this proposal, the first singular vector rises with a time constant (127 fs) 

closely resembling the RGB value (~100 fs) in the kinetic analysis (7). It likely includes 

photorhodopsin coupled to the reactive surface -crossing , together with bathorhodopsin. Our 

interpretation is consistent with the second left -singular vector (appearing at ~4 ps) having a rising 

time constant of 1.2 ps similar to thermally relaxed bathorhodopsin (~2.1 ps) (7).

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-9-

Fig 4. Timeline of X-ray scattering analysis of rhodopsin structural changes compared to 

photointermediates. (A) Light -minus -dark scattering profiles (left panels) showing evolution of averaged 

difference electron densities (right panels) from ~8000 paired MD simulations superimposed on retinal, 

Tyr 268 , and Trp 265 of dark -state rhodopsin from a random single trajectory. Positive difference density is 

shown by blue -colored mesh and negative by the red mesh around Tyr 268 and Trp 265 residues. The retinal 

isomerization was revealed by negative density at the 11 -cis bond and positive density for the trans 

conformation. Density maps are contoured at 40 σ. By 500 fs evolution of the difference density around 

the Tyr 268 residue is completed. (B) Complementary view of structures from time -resolved serial 

femtosecond crystallography. PDB codes: 7ZBE (dark), 8A6C (1 ps), 8A6D (10 ps), and 8A6E (100 ps) 15 .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-10 -

(C) X-ray structures of cryotrapped photointermediates . PDB codes: 1U19 (dark), 2G87 (bathorhodopsin, 

ps –ns scale), and 2HPY (lumirhodopsin, μs –scale) 14 . Center : sum of difference electron densities within 

5 Å of retinal versus time delay in ps, showing stabilization at ~500 fs. Center inset: expansion of sum for 

entire 10 -ps range. Note the TR -XSS experiments have greater time resolution than crystallography. Figure 

prepared with CHIMERA 52 .

In our experiment, we come close to the rarely observed theoretical CI point and measure the 

aftereffect of the potential surface crossing on the protein dynamics (7, 19 ). The scattering 

components suggest transfer of delocalized vibrations within the protein manifesting as a coherent, 

ballistic rearrangement of the protein scaffold that emerges immediately (<500 fs) from the non -

adiabatic transition (Fig 3H). This observation confirms that the retinal electronic relaxation is not 

dissipated thermally but is instead efficiently channeled into a directed mechanical trajectory, 

subsequently coupling with solvent on picosecond timescales. Our TR -XSS measurements 

co mplement serial crystallography (TR -SFX) (20 ) while avoiding crystal -lattice forces, e.g., as 

seen for photoactive yellow protein (PYP) (21 ). In TR -SFX the isomerization is fully complete 

before the first time point (at 1 ps) (20 ), corresponding to the earlier cryotrapped bathorhodopsin 

structure (33 ). However, our TR -XSS study has many time points (120 compared to 3 for TR -

SFX) and we resolve the cis –trans isomerization of retinal as it occurs in real time (Figs. 2E, 3H) —

the defining moment of visual photochemistry. 

Molecular simulations elucidate ultrafast X -ray scattering of visual receptors 

We conducted all -atom molecular simulations of rhodopsin equilibrated in detergent micelles 

with an explicit solvent 27 , to structurally interpret the ultrafast changes 4,7 . Our MD approach 

emulates more exact quantum -mechanics/molecular -mechanics methods corresponding to 

adiabatic states of the ground -potential energy surface (beyond the CI point or avoided crossing) 

(Fig. 1C) 2,20,28 . Although pushing the quantum limit 1,20 , it more fully captures the structural 

diversity inherent to the ensemble of rhodopsin molecules 27,29 . We conducted 18 independent, 

~600 -ns simulations of dark -state rhodopsin in CHAPS detergent micelles for an ensemble of 

10,000 starting configurations . From each configuration, we performed two paired simulations —

one where we continued the simulation directly from the saved state, and a second where we 

classically modeled the photon absorption. The trans state of the retinal was favored by transiently 

imposing a potential barrier (60 kcal/mol) to destabilize the cis state . Thereafter energy was added 

to the isomerized state to approximate the adiabatic energy gap versus the dark state . To separate 

intrinsic protein dynamics from retinal isomerization –induced conformational changes, we 

calculated MD -derived difference elec tron density maps 

Each atom in the separate trajectories was represented by a Gaussian function whose amplitude 

was determined by its corresponding number of electrons to generate electron density maps from 

the paired simulations 30 . Difference electron density maps (light –dark) were generated with a 100 -

fs time resolution and were averaged over all the trajectories 30 . The resultant single final map for 

each time point was superimposed on the dark -state rhodopsin coordinates (Fig. 4A). The large 

number of time points (Fig. 4B, C), revealed the ultrafast displacements of conserved amino acids 

coupled to the retinal isomer ization. Importantly, we found the largest initial electron density 

difference was located close to the C11=C12 double bond and the retinylidene protonated Schiff 

base (PSB) of Lys 296 (Fig. 4A), migrating toward the crucial β-ionone ring by 200 fs. The sum of 

difference electron densities near the active site (Fig. 4C center) shows that local structural changes 

grow until ~500 fs, after which they are completed, similar to the experime ntal TR -XSS data. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-11 -

Fig 5. Integrated DENSS fitting and MD simulations elucidate ultrafast rhodopsin dynamics. (A) Rhodopsin 

minus opsin experimental scattering profiles are fit to the calculated difference -scattering profiles (black) obtained 

from dark and light -activated coordinates for representative time points from a single trajectory (out of 8000 MD 

trajectories) using DENSS 31 . (B and C) Time sequence of optimized fitting parameters (in e/Å 3) obtained from 

DENSS fits of rhodopsin light activate scattering profiles, namely, excluded volume density (bulk solvent) (panel B), 

and hydration shell contrast (panel C). For visualization purposes, a low -pass filter was applied to the data (solid line ). 

Left insets : schematics of excluded volume (panel B, red) and hydration shell (panel C, blue). The red surface is made 

using CHIMERAX 53 .(D) Averaged difference (dark –light ) electron densities from MD simulations overlaid on dark 

retinal structure (red, negative; blue, positive difference electron density). Top left: difference at 1 ps and bottom left: 

10 -ps timescales. (E) Difference electron densities overlaid on the retinal from inactive dark -state TR -SFX crystal 

structure (PDB code: 7ZBE). Top right: panel is calculated from 1 -ps crystal structure (PDB code: 8A6C) and bottom 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-12 -                  

> right: 10 -ps crystal structure (PDB code: 8A6D). Both the simulations and crystallography show negative to positive
> electron density differences due to the C11=C12 bond isomerization. The MD simulations show greater motion of the
> crucial β-ionone ring. Figure pr epared with Coot 54 .(F) Left: time -dependent average displacement of center of mass
> |〈𝐝 𝐇 〉|of helices versus time after retinal isomerization. Right: sequence of transmembrane helical motions; H1,
> purple; H2, blue; H3, cyan; H4, green; H5, yellow; H6, orange; and H7, red. (G) Characterization of motions of amino
> acid residues as projection of center -of -mass displacement 𝐝 𝐚𝐚 (𝑡 )onto retinal distance vector r at time zero. Here R(0)
> and R( t) denote center of mass of the amino acid residue at times 0 and t, respectively. (H) Map of p-values for each
> of the residues sorted by their distance to retinal plotted against time. The p-values indicate statistically significant
> motion calculated for COM displacements for light versus dark simulations.

Next, to enable fitting of atomic models to the experimental TR -XSS data, we customized a 

module of DENSS 31 for implementation with the difference profiles (unlike conventional 

routines). Direct calculation from explicit coordinates proved highly sensitive to background 

mismatches between the equilibrated simulation box and the vacuum -cooled liquid jet. To iso late 

the biological signal, we utilized an implicit solvent model (DENSS) that treats the solvation 

environment as a statistical continuum. Robust fitting required allowing the implicit solvent 

density parameters —specifically excluded volume density  𝑐 1 and hydration shell contrast  𝑐 2 —to 

vary. These parameters function as mean -field proxies, absorbing ensemble -averaged protein -

solvent cross -terms and experimental baseline offsets. This approach circumvents the systematic 

errors of explicit calculations, confirming the protein structura l trajectory is consistent with the 

experimental data (Fig. 5A). 

Physically the solvent environment remains effectively static on this sub -picosecond timescale. 

However, the retinal isomerization triggers immediate, ballistic nuclear motions within the binding 

pocket (Fig 4A). Our implicit solvent analysis captures the modulation of the scattering 

interference pattern against the fixed solvent background by these localized atomic dis placements. 

These optimized parameters (Figs. 5B, C) begin to change within <100 fs, mirroring the first SVD 

component (Fig. 2A). This ultrafast timescale precludes thermal expansion, as heat dissipation 

from the buried chromophore to the bulk solvent requ ires picoseconds 32 . Given the negligible 

opsin TR -XSS signal (Fig 2B), the solvent parameter changes initiated by the retinal isomerization, 

are driven by the protein -solvent scattering cross -terms 33 . Here the varying density parameters are 

mathematical proxies for these changing cross -terms, effectively mapping the interaction between 

the impulsive protein kinetics and its static solvent cage. We leveraged this interaction to overcome 

the detection l imits of wide -angle scattering (WAXS), where minute signals are often obscured by 

destructive interference and solvent noise. By contrast, our low -q (SAXS) measurements benefit 

from intrinsic signal amplification: the protein -solvent cross -terms sum coherently, generating 

constructive interference. This magnification allowed unprecedented detection of ultrafast nuclear 

motions via the hydration shell proxy, unlike previous XFEL studies relying primarily on WAXS 

> 34 -37

, revealing structural dynamics that remain indiscernible in the wide -angle regime. 

Compared with time -resolved crystallography 15 , greater atomic displacements occur within 

the first 10 ps due to absence of crystal -lattice forces (Fig. 4B, C, 5D, E). Our simulations indicate 

sub -picosecond motions of key residues near the retinal binding pocket — Tyr 268 , Trp 265 , Ala 117 

and the Cys 110 –Cys 187 disulfide bond that serve as precursors to later intermediates 38,39 . Within the 

first 500 fs after photoisomerization, the retinylidene C9 -methyl group interacts with the Tyr 268 

phenolic ring (Fig. 5D) of a key functional hydrogen -bonding network 40 . Both the retinal C9 -

methyl group and the Tyr 268 residue are crucial to the catalytic activation of transducin by light -

activated rhodopsin (MII state) 40,41 . Hence we propose that ultrafast steric interaction of the Tyr 268 

phenolic ring with the C9 -methyl group initiates rhodopsin activation in the signaling cascade .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-13 -

These ultrafast changes are absent in the cryotrapped bathorhodopsin and lumirhodopsin structures 

at the longer ns -timescales (Fig. 4C) 14,42 . The transmembrane h elices most perturbed by retinal 

isomerization moved within hundreds of femtoseconds, peaking around 500 fs and 1.2 ps 

depending on the helix (Fig. 5F). Significant global protein movements were characterized by 

sorting the amino acid residues by their distance to retinal (Fig. 5H) and explained by their center -

of -mass displacement  𝐝 𝐚𝐚 (𝑡 ) from retinal ( COMD) versus time after light excitation (Figs. 5G, 

H). We found the perturbation due to retinal isomerization spreads at a rate of ~21 Å·ps –1,

approximately the speed of sound within the protein matrix 43,44 . The nonrandom helical motions 

indicate they are controlled by the protein structure. For GPCRs, conserved sequence motifs create 

weak spots in transmembrane helices involving helical motions, which require elimination or 

stabilization through mutation be fore crystal structures can be determined 45,46 . Our analysis 

effectively links the electronic energy of the conical intersection to the mechanical motions that 

initiate the earliest steps of the visual signaling cascade. 

Comparing rhodopsin to other photoactive proteins 

It is significant that rhodopsin differs from other non -light -driven proteins such as myoglobin 

and hemoglobin that have been investigated using TR -XSS methods 37,44,47 . For rhodopsin the 

system transitions into an excited electronic state yielding cis –trans isomerization of the ligand 2,3 .

This behavior contrasts with myoglobin and hemoglobin, which biologically do not involve light -

driven reactions. In those cases, light is used artificially to drive the dissociation of CO from the 

heme cofactor, followed by its re -binding 43,48 . Yet the energy landscape with hills and valleys 49 

is populated without any additional input of energy yielding the active state. By contrast, the 

rhodopsin photointermediates entail retinal isomerization, protein conformational changes, and 

solvent reorganization by energy coupling to the surroundings. Nuclear motions of retinal are 

captured when passing through the transition state of the photoproduct. Advances in next -

genera tion X -ray sources 50 will motivate applications to proteins with caged photoactive ligands, 

membrane lipids, and optogenetics 11,51 . Remaining questions include how X -ray scattering detects 

both nuclear and electronic motions and how internal energy of rhodopsin is partitioned in the 

visual process. Future insights will doubtlessly emerge at the nexus of ultrafast dynamics with 

phot ochemistry and structural biology in understanding biological mechanisms. 

## Methods 

Rhodopsin purification and sample preparation 

Retinal disk membranes (RDM) were isolated from bovine retinas as described 55 . Unless 

otherwise stated all procedures were done at 4 ºC under dim red light or darkness. Electronic (UV –

visible) absorption spectra for both the dark and light -exposed states of rhodopsin were acquired 

at room temperature with a modified Cary -50 UV -vis ible (single -beam) spectrometer (Varian, 

Inc.; Palo Alto, CA). Purified bovine RDM typically had unregenerated A280 /A500 absorption ratios 

< 2.9. The RDM samples were further characterized by their regenerability with 11 -cis -retinal or 

9-cis -retinal 55 with typical results of 5 % bleached, 97% regenerable, and regenerated A280 /A500 

spectral ratio ~2.0. To produce the required large amounts of solubilized rhodopsin (~1000 mg 

per beam time) a new detergent protocol was developed. Choice of the detergent entailed 

increasing the protein molar concentration relative to the pump laser f luence while supporting the 

photochemical functionality of rhodopsin 55 . The zwitterionic detergent 3-[(3 -

cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio] -1-propane sulfonate (CHAPS) ( Anatrace; Maumee, OH) 

was used owing to the small micelle aggregation number (~10 versus ~120 for n-dodecyl -β-D-

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-14 -

maltoside) and high critical micelle concentration (cmc, 8 mM), yielding a thin belt around the 

protein hydrophobic domain. The rhodopsin in RDMs was first solubilized in the cationic 

detergent dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB) (Sigma -Aldrich; St. L ouis, MO) and 

purified by hydroxyapatite (HA) column chromatography 55 . After HA column purification the 

final A280 /A500 ratio of < 1.9 indicated a highly pure rhodopsin sample. The detergent was then 

exchanged from DTAB to CHAPS by size -exclusion chromatography (SEC). The 

rhodopsin/DTAB solution was applied to a Sephadex G50 column and eluted with the CHAPS 

detergent buff er (typically 30 mM CHAPS, 15 mM phosphate, pH 6.7). Characterization of the 

CHAPS -isolated rhodopsin entailed dynamic light scattering; together with SDS gel -

electrophoresis and native mass spectrometry. The high -purity ( A280 /A500 <1.9) fractions were then 

pooled and concentrated using 30 -kDa centrifugal filters. The final rhodopsin/detergent molar 

ratio of the sample was nominally ~1:40 and the final concentration used at the beamtime was 

typically 10 mg mL –1, yielding a homogenous preparation. The samples were flash -frozen in 

liquid nitrogen in 15 -mL portions and stored at –80 ºC until thawed just prior to use. Typically, 

800 –1200 mg of the rhodopsin/CHAPS samples were produced for each beamtime. 

Time -resolved X -ray solution scattering data acquisition 

The diffract -then -destroy principle 56 was used to acquire the time -resolved X -ray solution 

scattering (TR -XSS) data with a pump -probe scheme. The reported studies used bovine rhodopsin 

reconstituted in CHAPS detergent (typically 10 mg mL –1) and the apoprotein opsin under identical 

conditions. Our experiments were conducted using an X -ray free -electron laser (XFEL) with self -

amplified  spontaneous emission  (SASE) at the Coherent X -ray Imaging (CXI) beamline of Linac 

Coherent Light Source (LCLS) at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory during beam time LU18. 

Additional supporting studies were conducted at LCLS during beam times LE71, LM59, LN60, 

LP99, and LW 75. For LU18 the XFEL pulse duration was 40 fs at 9.5 -keV energy ( λ = 1.3 Å), 

with a 120 -Hz repetition rate in the microfocus instrument in its standard configuration at CXI. 

The TR -XSS data were acquired using a Cornell -SLAC pixel -array (CSPAD) detector. The 

detector was moved back to 0.507 m which allowed us to collect the q-range between 0.06 Å –1 and 

1.2 Å –1 (q = 4π sin θ/λ, where the scattering angle is 2 θ and λ is the X -ray wavelength). The samples 

were delivered to the X -ray interaction region using a gas dynamic virtual nozzle (GDVN) or 3D -

printed nozzle (50 -μm inner diameter) 57 . The average liquid jet -diameter varied between 3 μm 

and 5 μm. The flow rate of the rhodopsin or opsin/CHAPS detergent solution varied between 25 

and 35 μL min –1. Samples were continuously replaced (jet velocity up to 70 m s –1) with the pump -

laser system triggered at 60 Hz, interleaving laser -on and laser -off measurements. To initiate the 

rhodopsin photochemistry, for the actinic light source (pump) we used an optical parametric 

amplifier (OPA) driven by a Ti:Sapphire laser (T OPAS; Spectra -Physics; Santa Clara, CA) with a 

~70 -fs pulse width at 527 nm in a collinear geometry. The laser was focused having a beam 

diameter of 0.195 mm (FWHM) with fluence of 1.33 mJ mm –2 at the interaction point . The OPA 

generated pulses of 30 uJ  ± 1% pulse energy, which were attenuated with a polarizer and a half -

wave plate. Photoselection of rhodopsin molecules with the retinal transition dipole moment 

aligned along the electric field of the actinic light pump was minimized by using circularly 

pol arized pump excitation. The scattering images were collected with –2 to +10 -ps nominal time 

delays between the optical pump and X -ray probe, in intervals of 100 fs. Each interval had an 

average of ~1250 shots. The profiles were also binned and grouped at 30 -fs time delays, which did 

not affect the conclusions (Fig. 3 of main text). The light –dark difference profiles spanned q-values 

from 0.06 to 1.2 Å –1. On -the -fly data reduction and analysis was done with a customized version 

of OnDA 58 developed for pump -probe TR -XSS studies. We used OnDA to monitor the time -

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-15 -

resolved difference scattering profiles directly from shared memory as the data were collected, 

before being written to disk. This capability informed our experimental strategy during the beam 

time by allowing us to optimize the alignment of the liquid jet and the spatial overlap of the pump 

laser. 

Analysis of light -minus -dark X -ray difference scattering profiles 

After radially averaging the profiles from each experimental run, the scattering profiles were 

binned corresponding to the time delay for both the holoprotein rhodopsin and the retinal -free 

apoprotein opsin. For both the rhodopsin and opsin proteins, the pump -probe time delays were 

obtained using the time tool 22 at the CXI beamline of LCLS . For a given sample, the light -minus -

dark difference profiles were obtained showing the changes in the radial scattering before and after 

the pump laser event. The dark profiles were obtained by radially averaging the images acquired 

when the pump laser arr ived after the X -ray pulse. The dark scattering profiles were first binned 

according to the median intensity in the high q-range between 0.6 and 1 Å -1. This region was 

selected because it had the least variation among all the shots. After binning the data, the outliers 

in each bin were filtered out before averaging. The outliers with more than two standard deviations 

from the median scattering profile w ere rejected based on the root mean square of the summed 

residuals as  𝑅 sqr = { ∑ [𝐼 𝑖 (𝑞 , 𝑡 0) − ⟨𝐼 (𝑞 )⟩]2 

> 𝑞

}1/2, where  𝐼 𝑖 (𝑞 , 𝑡 0) is the ith scattering profile and 

⟨𝐼 (𝑞 )⟩ is the median scattering profile for the given intensity bin. In the experiment, the scattering 

signal is a function of the liquid -jet thickness, sheath gas from the GDVN, and incident X -ray 

fluence. The X -ray fluence and jet thickness varied stochastica lly whereas the sheath gas remained 

essentially stable. Because the jet thickness was unknown from shot -to -shot, and the relative 

contributions from the liquid and the gas varied, we grouped (class averaged) the patterns 

according to the overall scattering signals before taking differences. The scattering intensity in the 

aforementioned q-range was used as an indicator for the product of the incident X -ray intensity 

and jet thickness. The light -minus -dark scattering profile differences were acquired between the 

shots with identical experimental conditions, such as liquid jet thickness and X -ray intensity, which 

used an alternating light/dark pulse scheme with the 120 -Hz XFEL, such that pumped images and 

dark images were from identical experimental conditions. We matched the pumped radial -

scattering profiles to the dark profiles belonging to the s ame median X -ray intensity bin. To 

account for variation within an intensity bin having several scattering profiles, each average dark -

profile was then fit to the pumped profile before being subtracted. The above scheme of light -

minus -dark subtraction was followed for the radial scattering profiles of both rhodopsin and its 

apoprotein opsin (the ligand -bound and apo forms). 

Rhodopsin -minus -opsin double -difference scattering profiles 

To compare rhodopsin to its apoprotein at positive time delay after the laser pump, we 

subtracted the above light -minus -dark difference scattering profiles of the apoprotein from that of 

rhodopsin. Profiles were binned according to the median intensity o f the pumped radial scattering 

profiles in the high q-range (between 0.3 and 1 Å –1). The q-range was chosen since both the ligand -

bound and apo forms of the protein (the apoprotein opsin and rhodopsin holoprotein) had similar 

scattering intensities in this range. After binning, the outliers in each bin were filtered before 

averaging. The aver aged negative time -delay difference profiles were subtracted from the positive 

time -delay difference scattering profiles for opsin and rhodopsin respectively to remove small 

artifacts in the signal, as the negative -time difference scattering profiles shoul d exhibit a negligible 

signal. A histogram of scattering intensities (photons per radial pixel) (Fig. 3A of main text) 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-16 -

showed that the majority of scattering images for both opsin and rhodopsin had intensities less 

than 0.2 X -ray photons per radial pixel. The corresponding opsin and rhodopsin difference profiles 

with the same shot intensities (< 0.2 photons per radial pixel) were matched and the ops in 

difference profiles were fit to the rhodopsin difference profiles using a least -squares routine. The 

fitted opsin difference radial scattering profiles (Fig. 2B of main text) were subtracted from 

rhodopsin difference scattering profiles (Fig. 2A of main text) to obtain the double -difference 

scattering profiles of rhodopsin minus opsin (Fig. 3D, E of main text). 

Kinetic analysis of double -difference X -ray scattering 

Analysis of the structural changes entailed singular value decomposition (SVD) of the double -

difference rhodopsin -minus -opsin scattering profiles as described above . The SVD of the 

scattering profiles produced left -singular vectors ( l-SVs) (Fig. S5A), right -singular vectors ( r-

SVs), and singular values. The r-SVs had the same structure as the difference scattering profiles 

and the l-SVs gave the time dependence of the r-SVs. Each of the singular values gave the relative 

weights of the singular vectors contributing to the double -difference rhodopsin -minus -opsin 

profiles. The SVD analysis revealed two major r-SVs as evidenced by the magnitude of the 

singular values (Fig. S5C). The two most prominent l-SVs weighted by the singular values gave 

the temporal behavior of the r-SVs (see Figs. 2D, E and 3G, H of main text). The time sequence 

of the l-SVs was used to relate the energy propagation by global structural perturbations to the 

lifetimes of optically detected photointermediates (see main text). The growth and decay of the 

two l-SVs were fit to a sum of two logistic functions, one for the rise and another for the l-SV 

decay. The general form of the logistic function is:  𝑦 = 𝑎 / [1 + 𝑒 −𝑏 (𝑡 −𝑐 )]. In this expression, a

is the maximum value at the plateau of the rise of the l-SV, where b is the steepness of the rise or 

decay of the l-SV, and c defines the inflexion or midpoint of the rise or the decay of the r-SV. The 

time -constants of the rise/decay of the l-SVs were defined as  1/𝑏 , which were obtained from the 

fits of the sum of logistic functions to the two prominent l-SVs. This model -free approach is very 

similar to the fits of the time -dependent singular vectors 59 using an exponential decay function 

convoluted with a Gaussian instrument response function 37 . Our time -dependent r-SVs were better 

represented numerically by a logistic function as each of them have both a rise and a decay. 

Molecular dynamics simulations 

The crystal structure of dark -state bovine rhodopsin (PDB code: 1U19) 13 was used as the 

starting structure for the simulations in CHAPS detergent micelles. Rhodopsin was inserted into 

a 109 -Å cubic box with its geometric centroid at the origin and its calculated membrane normal as 

in the Orientation of Proteins in Membranes (OPM) database 60 aligned to the z-axis. The water 

boxes were large enough so that the spatial envelopes could segregate the solvent layer of the 

solute from bulk water 43,61 . The initial conformations of the micellar detergents were randomly 

chosen from the CHARMM -GUI website library (http://www.charmm -

gui.org/?doc=archive&lib=lipid ) 62 . In total, 40 CHAPS molecules were iteratively placed around 

the protein inside a cylindrical shell with height equal to the thickness of the receptor 

transmembrane region (21.1 Å) 60 . The inner radius was equal to the maximum radius of the 

receptor in the TM region (22.9 Å), and the outer radius was equal to the inner radius plus the 

average detergent length in the library (25.7 Å). Detergent placements were accepted or rejected 

base d on the minimum distance to other protein and detergent atoms (cutoff < 1.75 Å), and the 

relative orientation of the tail and headgroup versus the micelle center. The resulting 

protein/micelle complexes were solvated with 39,378 water molecules and 150 mM NaCl (plus 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-17 -

one neutralizing sodium ion). This process was repeated to generate a total of 18 solvated micelle 

systems (simulations). 

Before investigating the activation dynamics of the protein, each protein/micelle system had a 

production run of ∼600 ns in the dark state, for a combined simulation time of over 10 μs . The 

simulation time of 10 μs was required to capture the relaxation of structural diversity in the dark 

state of rhodopsin 27 . The starting points of the (paired) activation simulations (described below) 

were obtained from this dark -state conformational ensemble. We conducted molecular dynamics 

(MD) simulations on the Summit computer at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), using the 

NAMD simulation package (version 2.13) 63 with the CHARMM36 force field 64 -66 and retinal 

parameters 67 . The velocity Verlet integrator was used for dynamics propagation and all hydrogen -

containing bonds were constrained with the SHAKE algorithm 68 to allow for a 2 -fs timestep. 

Treatment of long -range electrostatics entailed the smooth particle -mesh Ewald (PME) summation 

method, employing a grid spacing of 1 Å. The real -space cutoff for nonbonded interactions was 

12 Å. The dark -state rhodopsin/micelle systems were minimized and initially equilibrated in the 

canonical NVT ensemble with position restraints on the protein and the detergents. The detergent 

restraints were then switched off and the micelle equilibrated for 100 ns in the NPT ensemble 61 .

After that, the protein restraints were tapered off over 1 ns before entering the production runs. 

The NPT conditions (1.01 bar and 310.15 K) were maintained with a Langevin piston (oscillation 

period = 200 fs; damping timescale = 100 fs) and a Langevin thermostat (damping coefficient = 2 

ps –1). 

To explore rhodopsin activation at ultrafast timescales, we ran 10,080 paired (dark and light -

activated) simulations. As the experimental timescales were short (fs –ps ), the feasibility of running 

many activation trajectories improved the convergence of the results. For the paired simulation 

systems construction, the starting configurations were taken from the dark -state rhodopsin/micelle 

systems as described above. Br iefly, atomic coordinates and velocities were extracted from the 

dark trajectories every 1 ns, for a total of 10,080 initial configurations. Each starting configuration 

was forked into a pair of (initially) identical simulations (dark and light -excited), b eginning with 

identical coordinates and velocities, such that cancellation of signals not related to light excitation 

(e.g., water, lipids, remainder of the protein) was optimal when taking the paired difference 

between the two conditions. This noise redu ction scheme was critical, as the signal of interest can 

be several orders of magnitude smaller than the noise. For each paired system, one simulation 

(dark) was left unchanged in the dark state. The other simulation (light) was light -excited 

classically by inducing retinal isomerization from 11 -cis to all -trans and increasing the retinal 

kinetic energy. The original potential for this torsion is shown in pink. To induce retinal 

isomerization, we temporally modified the potential of the C10 -C11=C12 -C13 dihedral. and 

adjusted the force field parameters to impose a 60 k cal mol –1 energy barrier on the cis configuration 

of the C10 –C11=C12 –C13 torsion potential during the first 0.5 ps to favor the trans configuration 

(as shown in yellow) 69 . The choice of torsional potential was validated against NMR results for 

the later photointermediates 69 , and also agrees with the electronic excitation energies for S o to S 1

transition for rhodopsin calculated in previous QM/MM studies by Battista et. al 70 . With the 

energy barrier, retinal isomerization was completed within ∼200 fs, as characterized 

experimentally 5. After 0.5 ps the original torsion potential was restored, and the simulation 

continued. At this point, we scaled up the velocities to capture energy released when the retinal 

would have relaxed to its ground state. This approach was sufficient for roughly 79% of the 

trajectories to undergo cis -trans transition, showing that we retained the effects of the protein 

environment. To increase the kinetic energy of retinal, the initial velocities of its polyene chain 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-18 -

atoms were rescaled as vi*= [( Kret + Eadd ) / Kret ]1/2 vi where vi* is the initial velocity of the ith atom, 

vi is its rescaled velocity, Kret is the sum of kinetic energies of the polyene atoms, and Eadd is the 

energy of one actinic photon as used in the experiment ( ∼54.25 kcal mol –1 at 527 nm). Notably, 

the addition of Eadd alone —without modifying the potential of the C11=C12 torsion — was not 

enough to induce retinal isomerization in this classic model. Each paired simulation was run for 

10 ps, with the same simulation parameters used for the parent dark -state trajectories. Only the 

temperature control was different, as the thermostat was turned off to preserve the correct short -

time dynamics. From the paired simulations, atomic coordinates were stored every 100 fs and 

analyzed as described below. 

Analysis of molecular dynamics trajectories 

Subsequent trajectory processing and analysis was performed on BlueHive, the Linux cluster 

at the University of Rochester. For each of 10,080 paired (dark and light -activated) simulations., 

the individual frames were superimposed onto the dark -state crystal structure (PDB code: 1U19)  

> 13

using a Kabsch least -squares algorithm 71,72 with the transmembrane (TM) α -carbons as the 

alignment selection. This procedure minimized the deviation of TM α -carbons from the dark state 

structure thereby allowing comparison of the time -dependent structural changes within the 

ensemble of trajectories for a given time point. Torsions along the retinal polyene chain were 

scanned and the simulation pairs with deviations larger than 90º from the trans configuration (or 

cis configuration of the C10 –C11=C12 –C13 torsion in the dark trajectories) were excluded (20%). 

In total, 8,016 dark/light trajectory pairs were included in the subsequent analyses. All reported 

averages were computed by taking the difference between the pa ired dark and light frames as a 

function of time and calculating the mean over 8,016 differences. Error bars indicate the mean ± 

standard error (SE) computed by treating each difference as a single data point. Dark controls were 

calculated by randomly pair ing 10,000 dark trajectories and taking their difference as a function 

of simulation time. Statistical significance was assessed through paired t-tests comparing the dark 

and light sets at a given time point, with a significance level of 0.01. All estimated p-values were 

corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Holm -Šídák algorithm implemented in 

StatsModels 73 . Unless otherwise stated, all analyses were conducted using in -house code available 

upon request or existing analysis tools included in LOOS 71,72 . The LOOS source code is available 

for download on GitHub ( http://github.com/GrossfieldLab/loos ). Trajectory visualization, image 

rendering, and data plotting were done with VMD (version 1.9.3) 74 , PyMOL (version 2.1.0) 75 ,

and Gnuplot (version 5.0), respectively. 

We computed the time -resolved electron densities of the protein and the ligand using the 

EMAN2 program 30 where each atom in the separate trajectories (from the paired simulations) was 

represented by a Gaussian function whose amplitude was determined by its corresponding number 

of electrons. The PDB files were generated containing a subset of atoms from the a ligned dark and 

light trajectories using the subsetter tool from LOOS 71 . Next, the electron density map of each 

PDB file was computed with the e2pdb2mrc tool, while light –dark difference maps were generated 

with the e2proc3d tool 30 . The resulting maps were averaged using the e2buildstacks tool and the 

e2proc3d tool 30 with the --average flag. The consecutive differences of averaged light -minus -dark 

differences were obtained using Chimera 52 . Summing of light -minus -dark electron densities (Fig. 

4 center of main text) and the consecutive differences (i.e., current time point minus previous time 

point) were done using DENSS with in -house code 76 . Changes in the positions of amino acids 

versus retinal were calculated the projection  𝐝 aa (𝑡 )⋅𝐫  of the center -of -mass displacement (COMD) 

𝐝 aa (𝑡 ) vector onto the distance vector r to retinal at time zero (Fig. 5G). Since the retinal is the 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-19 -

source of energy from photon absorption , the motivation of this type of analysis was to compare 

the changes in an ensemble of rhodopsin trajectories without needing to align the individual 

structures within an ensemble. Here r is the vector between center -of -masses of an amino acid to 

that of the retinal at time zero;  𝐑 aa (0) and  𝐑 aa (t) denote the center of mass of the amino acid 

residue at times 0 and t, respectively; and  𝐝 aa (𝑡 ) = 𝐑 aa (𝑡 ) − 𝐑 aa (0) is the COMD of the amino 

acid residue versus retinal. The corresponding p-values were calculated for the COMDs of the 

amino acids versus retinal from both light versus and dark simulations (see above) enabling 

detection of sub -picosecond motions of residues due to light activation .

DENSS analysis of double -difference scattering with calculated scattering profiles 

To enable fitting of the atomic models from MD to the experimental data, we built a custom 

version of DENSS -PDB2MRC 31 to work explicitly with the experimental time -resolved 

difference profiles, unlike the conventional tools like CRYSOL 77 and DENSS -PDB2MRC which 

fit standard, absolute scattering profiles, not time -resolved difference scattering profiles. For each 

of the 120 time points, DENSS -PDB2MRC was used to calculate scattering profiles from the 

pumped and dark PDBs from a single, ran domly chosen molecular dynamics trajectory. The 

profiles were optimized by using two parameters, namely the bulk solvent density/excluded 

volume parameter ( c1) and hydration shell contrast ( c2) (both in electron density units; e –/Å3 ) in 

the q-range from 0.06 Å–1 to 0.40 Å –1 31 . For each difference scattering profile, we thus required 

two independent fitting parameters, ( c1, c2) for the light (pumped) state, and three additional fixed 

parameters ( c1 and c2 for the dark reference state and a global scale factor). Excellent fits were 

obtained between the experimental double -difference profiles and the calculated profiles (Fig 5A). 

The analysis involved finding the above fitting parameters for both light -activated and dark 

scattering profiles. We first conducted a dark parameter optimization at two positive time delays 

(1.0, and 8.0 ps) by minimizing the χ2 value between the calculated and experimental rhodopsin 

minus opsin scattering profiles and simultaneously optimized all six fitting parameters (two for 

dark, two for each light state), plus one additional global scale factor. An in -house script with 

iter ative optimization using the Nelder -Mead method provided the best dark parameters (i.e. the 

scale factor and c 1/c 2 for the dark profiles at these time points) with initial guesses for c 1 and c 2

used based on electron density of the pure water at room temperature ( c1 = 0.334 e –/Å3) and 

assuming a 10% change in the hydration shell contrast as compared to that of pure water ( c2 as 

0.03 e –/Å3). Once the dark state parameters were optimized, the two light (pumped) parameters 

were then optimized for each experimental TR -XSS difference profile independently, while 

holding the two dark parameters and scale factor fixed for each of the time delays shown in Figure 

5B. These parameters are similar to that used in other implicit solvation -based programs used to 

calculate the scattering profiles such as CRYSOL 77 . Notably, while any time points in principle 

can be used to find the dark parameters, we used these time points as they constitute the largest 

intensities in the double -difference scattering profiles and have relatively higher signal -to -noise 

ratio as com pared to earlier time points. 

References 

1. Gozem, S., Luk, H. L., Schapiro, I. & Olivucci, M. Chem. Rev. 117 , 13502 -13565 (2017). 

2. Yang, X., Manathunga, M., Gozem, S., Léonard, J., Andruniów, T. et al. Nat. Chem. 14 ,

441 -449 (2022). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-20 -

3. Kukura, P., McCamant, D. W., Yoon, S., Wandschneider, D. B. & Mathies, R. A. Science 

310 , 1006 -1009 (2005). 

4. Schnedermann, C., Yang, X., Liebel, M., Spillane, K. M., Lugtenburg, J. et al. Nat. 

Chem. 10 , 449 -455 (2018). 

5. Schoenlein, R. W., Peteanu, L. A., Mathies, R. A. & Shank, C. V. Science 254 , 412 -415 

(1991). 

6. Lewis, J. W. & Kliger, D. S. Meth. Enzymol. 315 , 164 -178 (2000). 

7. Polli, D., Altoè, P., Weingart, O., Spillane, K. M., Manzoni, C. et al. Nature 467 , 440 -443 

(2010). 

8. Johnson, P. J. M., Halpin, A., Morizumi, T., Prokhorenko, V. I., Ernst, O. P. et al. Nat. 

Chem. 7, 980 -986 (2015). 

9. Smith, S. O. Annu Rev Biophys 52 , 301 -317 (2023). 

10. Ernst, O. P., Lodowski, D. T., Elstner, M., Hegemann, P., Brown, L. S. et al. Chem. Rev. 

114 , 126 –163 (2014). 

11. Zhang, F., Vierock, J., Yizhar, O., Fenno, L. E., Tsunoda, S. et al. Cell 147 , 1446 -1457 

(2011). 

12. Palczewski, K. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 75 , 743 -767 (2006). 

13. Okada, T., Sugihara, M., Bondar, A. -N., Elstner, M., Entel, P. et al. J. Mol. Biol. 342 ,

571 -583 (2004). 

14. Nakamichi, H. & Okada, T. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103 , 12729 -12734 (2006). 

15. Gruhl, T., Weinert, T., Rodrigues, M. J., Milne, C. J., Ortolani, G. et al. Nature 615 , 939 -

944 (2023). 

16. Park, J. H., Scheerer, P., Hofmann, K. P., Choe, H. -W. & Ernst, O. P. Nature 454 , 183 -

187 (2008). 

17. Choe, H. -W., Kim, Y. J., Park, J. H., Morizumi, T., Pai, E. F. et al. Nature 471 , 651 -655 

(2011). 

18. Zhao, D. Y., Pöge, M., Morizumi, T., Gulati, S., Van Eps, N. et al. J. Biol. Chem. 294 ,

14215 -14230 (2019). 

19. Jumper, J., Evans, R., Pritzel, A., Green, T., Figurnov, M. et al. Nature 596 , 583 -589 

(2021). 

20. Hosseinizadeh, A., Breckwoldt, N., Fung, R., Sepehr, R., Schmidt, M. et al. Nature 599 ,

697 -701 (2021). 

21. Konold, P. E., Arik, E., Weißenborn, J., Arents, J. C., Hellingwerf, K. J. et al. Nat. 

Commun. 11 , 4248 (2020). 

22. Beye, M., Krupin, O., Hays, G., Reid, A. H., Rupp, D. et al. Appl. Phys. Lett. 100 ,

121108 (2012). 

23. Nass Kovacs, G., Colletier, J. -P., Grünbein, M. L., Yang, Y., Stensitzki, T. et al. Nat. 

Commun. 10 , 3177 (2019). 

24. Cammarata, M., Levantino, M., Schotte, F., Anfinrud, P. A., Ewald, F. et al. Nat. 

Methods 5, 881 -886 (2008). 

25. Miller, R. J. D., Paré -Labrosse, O., Sarracini, A. & Besaw, J. E. Nat. Commun. 11 , 1240 

(2020). 

26. Wang, Q., Schoenlein, R. W., Peteanu, L. A., Mathies, R. A. & Shank, C. V. Science 266 ,

422 -424 (1994). 

27. Salas -Estrada, L. A., Leioatts, N., Romo, T. D. & Grossfield, A. Biophys. J. 114 , 355 –

367 (2018). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-21 -

28. Videla, P. E., Markmann, A. & Batista, V. S. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 14 , 1198 -1205 

(2018). 

29. Leioatts, N., Mertz, B. M., Martínez -Mayorga, K., Romo, T. D., Pitman, M. C. et al. 

Biochemistry 53 , 376 -385 (2014). 

30. Tang, G., Peng, L., Baldwin, P. R., Mann, D. S., Jiang, W. et al. J. Struct. Biol. 157 , 38 –

46 (2007). 

31. Chamberlain, S. R., Moore, S. & Grant, T. D. Biophys. J. 122 , 4567 -4581 (2023). 

32. Yu, X. & Leitner, D. M. J. Phys. Chem. B 107 , 1698 -1707 (2003). 

33. Park, S., Bardhan, J. P., Roux, B. & Makowski, L. J. Chem. Phys. 130 , 134114 (2009). 

34. Arnlund, D., Johansson, L. C., Wickstrand, C., Barty, A., Williams, G. J. et al. Nature 

Methods 11 , 923 -926 (2014). 

35. Malmerberg, E., Omran, Z., Hub, J. S., Li, X., Katona, G. et al. Biophys. J. 101 , 1345 -

1353 (2011). 

36. Malmerberg, E., Bovee -Geurts, P. H. M., Katona, G., Deupi, X., Arnlund, D. et al. 

Science Signaling 8, ra26 -ra26 (2015). 

37. Lee, Y., Kim, J. G., Lee, S. J., Muniyappan, S., Kim, T. W. et al. Nat. Commun. 12 , 3677 

(2021). 

38. Patel, A. B., Crocker, E., Eilers, M., Hirshfeld, A., Sheves, M. et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. 

Sci. U.S.A. 101 , 10048 -10053 (2004). 

39. Ahuja, S., Hornak, V., Yan, E. C. Y., Syrett, N., Goncalves, J. A. et al. Nat. Struct. Mol. 

Biol. 16 , 168 -175 (2009). 

40. Janz, J. M. & Farrens, D. L. J. Biol. Chem. 279 , 55886 –55894 (2004). 

41. Vogel, R., Fan, G. -B., Sheves, M. & Siebert, F. Biochemistry 39 , 8895 -8908 (2000). 

42. Nakamichi, H. & Okada, T. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 45 , 4270 -4273 (2006). 

43. Brinkmann, L. U. & Hub, J. S. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113 , 10565 -10570 (2016). 

44. Levantino, M., Schirò, G., Lemke, H. T., Cottone, G., Glownia, J. M. et al. Nat. Commun. 

6, 6772 (2015). 

45. Bibbe, J. M. & Vriend, G. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 89 , 1577 -1586 (2021). 

46. Munk, C., Mutt, E., Isberg, V., Nikolajsen, L. F., Bibbe, J. M. et al. Nature Methods 16 ,

151 -162 (2019). 

47. Henry, L., Panman, M. R., Isaksson, L., Claesson, E., Kosheleva, I. et al. Struct. Dyn. 7,

054702 (2020). 

48. Frauenfelder, H., Chen, G., Berendzen, J., Fenimore, P. W., Jansson, H. et al. Proc. Natl. 

Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106 , 5129 -5134 (2009). 

49. Dashti, A., Mashayekhi, G., Shekhar, M., Ben Hail, D. B., Salah, S. et al. Nat. Commun. 

11 , 4734 (2020). 

50. Konold, P. E., Monrroy, L., Bellisario, A., Filipe, D., Adams, P. et al. Nat. Methods 21 ,

1608 -1611 (2024). 

51. Hü ll, K., Morstein, J. & Trauner, D. Chem. Rev. 118 , 10710−10747 (2018). 

52. Pettersen, E. F., Goddard, T. D., Huang, C. C., Couch, G. S., Greenblatt, D. M. et al. J. 

Comput. Chem. 25 , 1605 -1612 (2004). 

53. Meng, E. C., Goddard, T. D., Pettersen, E. F., Couch, G. S., Pearson, Z. J. et al. Protein 

Sci. 32 , e4792 (2023). 

54. Emsley, P. & Cowtan, K. Acta Cryst. D60 , 2126 -2132 (2004). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-22 -

55. Brown, M. F. in Membrane Protein Structure: Methods and Protocols, Methods in 

Molecular Biology (eds. Vaidehi, N. & Klein -Seetharaman, J.) 127 -153 (Springer 

Science+Business Media, LLC, 2012). 

56. Neutze, R., Wouts, R., van der Spoel, D., Weckert, E. & Hajdu, J. Nature 406 , 752 -757 

(2000). 

57. Nazari, R., Zaare, S., Alvarez, R. C., Karpos, K., Engelman, T. et al. Opt. Express 28 ,

21749 (2020). 

58. Mariani, V., Morgan, A., Yoon, C. H., Lane, T. J., White, T. A. et al. J. Appl. Cryst. 49 ,

1073 –1080 (2016). 

59. Oang, K. Y., Yang, C., Muniyappan, S., Kim, J. & Ihee, H. Struct. Dyn. 4, 044013 

(2017). 

60. Lomize, M. A., Pogozheva, I. D., Joo, H., Mosberg, H. I. & Lomize, A. L. Nucleic Acids 

Res. 40 , D370 –D376 (2012). 

61. Knight, C. J. & Hub, J. S. Nucleic Acids Res. 43 , W225 -230 (2015). 

62. Cheng, X., Jo, S., Lee, H. S., Klauda, J. B. & Im, W. J. Chem. Inf. Model 53 , 2171−2180 

(2013). 

63. Phillips, J. C., Braun, R., Wang, W., Gumbart, J., Tajkhorshid, E. et al. J. Comp. Chem. 

26 , 1781 -1802 (2005). 

64. Best, R. B., Zhu, X., Shim, J., Lopes, P. E. M., Mittal, J. et al. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 

8, 3257−3273 (2012). 

65. Venable, R. M., Luo, Y., Gawrisch, K., Roux, B. & Pastor, R. W. J. Phys. Chem. B 117 ,

10183−10192 (2013). 

66. Klauda, J. B., Monje, V., Kim, T. & Im, W. J. Phys. Chem. B 116 , 9424−9431 (2012). 

67. Zhu, S., Brown, M. F. & Feller, S. E. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135 , 9391 -9398 (2013). 

68. Ryckaert, J. -P., Ciccotti, G. & Berendsen, H. J. C. J. Comp. Phys. 23 , 327 -341 (1977). 

69. Grossfield, A., Pitman, M. C., Feller, S. E., Soubias, O. & Gawrisch, K. J. Mol. Biol. 381 ,

478 -486 (2008). 

70. Gascón, J. A., Sproviero, E. M. & Batista, V. S. Accounts of Chemical Research 39 , 184 -

193 (2006). 

71. Romo, T. D. & Grossfield, A. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2009 , 2332 -2335 

(2009). 

72. Romo, T. D., Leioatts, N. & Grossfield, A. J. Comp. Chem. 35 , 2305 –2318 (2014). 

73. Seabold, S. & Perktold, J. Proc. 9th Python in Science Conference (2010). 

74. Humphrey, W., Dalke, A. & Schulten, K. J. Mol. Graph. 14 , 33 -38 (1996). 

75. DeLano, W. L. in http://www.pymol.org (2002). 

76. Grant, T. D. Nat. Methods 15 , 191 -193 (2018). 

77. Svergun, D., Barberato, C. & Koch, M. H. J. Journal of Applied Crystallography 28 , 768 -

773 (1995). 

Acknowledgments: 

We dedicate this paper to the memory of Professor John Spence (April 21, 1946 –June 28, 

2021). Experiments were carried out at the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS), a national user 

facility operated by Stanford University on behalf of the US Department of Energy (DOE), Office 

of Basic Energy Sciences (OBES). Use of the Linac Coherent Light Source at SLAC National 

Accelerator Laboratory, is supported by the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office 

of Basic Energy Sciences under Contract No. DE -AC 02 -76SF00515. Research was carried out at 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-23 -

LCLS during beam time LU18, with additional studies during beam times LE71, LM59, LN60, 

LP99, and LW75. We acknowledge support from US National Institutes of Health awards 

R01GM133998 (T.D.G.), R01EY012049 (M.F.B.), and R01EY026041 (M.F.B.); the US National 

Science Foundation awards DBI CAREER 1943448 (R.A.K.), DBI 1565180 (R.A.K. and N.A.Z.), 

CHE 1904125 (M.F.B.), and MCB 1817862 (M.F.B., T.D.G., P.F., A.G., R.A.K., and N.A.Z.); and 

the Russian Foundation for Basic Research grant 16 -04 -00494A (A.V.S.). F.P. acknowledges 

support by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg foundation (g rant no. 2023.0052). We thank the US 

National Science Foundation for providing funding of this work through the BioXFEL Science 

and Technology Center grant DBI 1231306 (T.D.G., P.F., R.A.K. and M.F.B.). S.M.D.C.P.. was 

supported by a Technology Research Initiative Fund (TRIF) predoctoral fellowship from the 

University of Arizona; L.S. -E. was supported by a Goodman dissertation fellowship; and S.D.E.F. 

was partially supported by a Goldwater research scholarship. We t hank M. T. Marty for the native 

mass spectrometry studies. The authors are grateful to the University of Arizona Department of 

Chemistry and Biochemistry Electronics Shop for design and fabrication of experimental 

apparatus and for support from the Biodesi gn Center for Applied Structural Discovery at Arizona 

State University. We thank S. Botha, D. Deponte, M. Holl, C. Kupitz, C. Li, J. Martin -Garcia, and 

G. Nelson for support with the sample injection and data acquisition. We thank the Center of 

Integrated Research Computing at the University of Rochester for the provision of computational 

resources. This research used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility, which 

is a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported under Contract DE -AC05 -00 OR22725. We 

gratefully acknowledge discussions with H. Chapman, D. Matyushov, R. Neutze, M. Olivucci, T. 

Sakmar, G. Schertler, I. Schlichting, and S. Smith during the course of this work. 

Funding: 

National Institutes of Health (GM133998 to T.D.G.; EY012049 and EY026041 to M.F.B.) 

National Science Foundation (CAREER DBI -1943448 to R.A.K.; DBI -1565180 to R.A.K. and 

N.A.Z.; CHE -1904125 to M.F.B.; and MCB -1817862 to M.F.B., T.D.G., P.F., A.G., R.A.K., 

and N.A.Z.) 

Russian Foundation for Basic Research (16 -04 -00494A to A.V.S.) 

US National Science Foundation through the BioXFEL Science and Technology Center (DBI 

1231306 to T.D.G., P.F., R.A.K., and M.F.B.) 

Technology Research Initiative Fund predoctoral fellowship from the University of Arizona 

(to S.M.D.C.P) 

Goodman dissertation fellowship from the University of Rochester (to L.S. -E.) 

Goldwater research scholarship from the University of Arizona (to S.D.E.F) 

Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation (2023.0052 to F.P.). 

Author contributions: 

M.F.B. conceived the experiment and T.D.G., S.M.D.C.P., A.V.S., D.M., P.F., R.A.K. and 

M.F.B. carried out the experimental design. S.M.D.C.P., A.V.S., X.X., S.D.E.F., N.W., and U.C. 

developed the rhodopsin protocol, prepared, and characterized the rhodopsin -detergent samples. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.10.737858 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-24 -

L.S. -E., A.S., and A.G. carried out and analyzed the molecular dynamics simulations. R.A., K.K., 

S.L. R.N., S.Z., and R.A.K. developed, tested, and operated the gas dynamic virtual nozzle 

(GDVN) sample delivery system. S.C., S.B., and R.A.K. set up and ali gned the optical parametric 

amplifier for the pump -probe experiments. M.S.H., M.L., M.D.S., and S.B. set up and aligned the 

beamline, characterized the beam focus, and calibrated the timing tool. T.D.G., S.M.D.C.P., 

A.V.S., X. X., S.D.E.F., J.C., R.F., K.K., D.M., F.P., S.C., M.S.H., M.L., M.D.S., S.B., D .M., P.F., 

R.A.K., and M.F.B. carried out the experiments . T.D.G., C.S.K.M., S.C., S.M., K.K., N.A.Z., F.P., 

D.M., and R.A.K. analyzed the experimental data. T.D.G., C.S.K.M, A.G., P.F., R.A.K., and 

M.F.B. wrote and edited the manuscript with discussion, review, and contributions from all 

authors. 

Competing interests: Authors declare that they have no competing interests. 

Data and materials availability: All processed experimental data included in the article and/or 

SM will be released at the University of Arizona Research Data Repository) upon publication. 

Raw X -ray data will be deposited in the Coherent X -ray Imaging Data Bank (CXIDB) and released 

upon publication ( https://www.cxidb.org/index.html ). Python scripts used in the data analysis and 

reduction will be made available on GitHub upon publication. The LOOS source code is available 

for download on GitHub ( http://github.com/GrossfieldLab/loos ).