Pulse, polarization and topology shaping of polariton fluids
Lorenzo Dominicia, David Colasb, Stefano Donatib, Galbadrakh Dagvadorjc,
Antonio Gianfratea, Carlos S´anchez Mu˜nozb, Dario Ballarinia, Milena De Giorgia,
Giuseppe Giglia, Marzena H. Szyma´nskad, Fabrice P. Laussyb, and Daniele Sanvittoa
aCNR NANOTEC, Istituto di Nanotecnologia, Via Monteroni, 73100 Lecce, Italy
bDepartamento de F´ısica Te´orica de la Materia Condensada, UAM, 28049 Madrid, Spain
cDepartment of Physics, University of Warwick, CV47AL Coventry, UK
dDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, WC1E6BT London, UK
ABSTRACT
Here we present different approaches to ultrafast pulse and polarization shaping,
based on a “quantum fluid” platform of polaritons. Indeed we exploit the normal
modes of two dimensional polariton fluids made of strong coupled quantum well
excitons and microcavity photons, by rooting different polarization and topological
states into their sub-picosecond Rabi oscillations. Coherent control of two resonant
excitation pulses allows us to prepare the desired state of the polariton, taking
benefit from its four-component features given by the combination of the two normal
modes with the two degrees of polarization.
An ultrafast imaging based on the
digital off-axis holography technique is implemented to study the polariton complex
wavefunction with time and space resolution. We show in order coherent control of
the polariton state on the Bloch sphere, an ultrafast polarization sweeping of the
Poincar´e sphere, and the dynamical twist of full Poincar´e states such as the skyrmion
on the sphere itself. Finally, we realize a new kind of ultrafast swirling vortices by
adding the angular momentum degree of freedom to the two-pulse scheme. These
oscillating topology states are characterized by one or more inner phase singularities
tubes which spirals around the axis of propagation. The mechanism is devised in
the splitting of the vortex into the upper and lower polaritons, resulting in an
oscillatory exchange of energy and angular momentum and in the emitted time and
space structured photonic packets.
1. INTRODUCTION
W
e make use of microcavity polaritons,1 a “quantum fluid” platform constituted by bosonic hybrid quasi-
particles of strongly coupled excitons and photons fields, in order to achieve different kind of intensity,
polarization and topology shaping. Due to the photonic outcoupling of the polaritons, which makes possible
their resonant excitation and detection, such time and space structured-field features are tranferred to the emit-
ted optical pulses too. The realization of exciton polariton condensates in semiconductor microcavities2,3 has
paved the way for a prolific series of studies into quantum hydrodynamics in two-dimensional systems.4–12 Mi-
crocavity polaritons are intriguing systems for the study of topological excitations in nonequilibrium interacting
superfluids, also thanks to rich spinorial patterns and polarization splitting terms leading to typical spin-orbit
coupling.13–15 In very recent works,16,17 thanks to significant progress in both the quality of the structures and
L.D.: lorenzo.dominici@gmail.com, F.P.L.: fabrice.laussy@gmail.com — This paper was originally published in:
Complex Light and Optical Forces XI, edited by David L. Andrews, Enrique J. Galvez, Jesper Gl¨uckstad,
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 10120, 101200E © 2017 SPIE CCC code: 0277-786X/17/$18 · doi: 10.1117/12.2250997.
One print or electronic copy may be made for personal use only. Systematic or multiple reproduction, distribution to
multiple locations via electronic or other means, duplication of any material in this paper for a fee or for commercial
purposes, or modification of the content of the paper are prohibited.
The final published version is available at:
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2250997
arXiv:2605.10403v1  [cond-mat.other]  11 May 2026


in the laboratory state of the art, we have been able to both observe and control the microcavity polariton Rabi
dynamics. We can span from Rabi oscillating configurations to eigenstate superpositions, and control them by
multiple optical pulses that can amplify or switch states. Moreover, by exploting the spin degree of freedom,
we have been able to tranfer the intensity oscillations into polarization oscillations, thus making such systems
even more suitable for polarization shaping engineering and applications. Space structured topology such as
full Poincar´e skyrmion beams have be imprinted too and their reshaping described in the polarization space.18
The most recent of our experiments and models are hence pushed further on, by empowering with the Rabi
oscillations the ultrafast topology shaping of quantized vortices, as shown in the last section of this work.
Figure 1. Experimental polariton dispersion. The emission is obtained after off-resonant excitation. The bare modes are
denoted as dashed lines, microcavity mode (C, red) and quantum well exciton (X, blue). The polariton normal modes
are denoted as solid lines, UPB (U, violet) and LPB (L, green). A sketch of a resonant femtosecond laser tuned to excite
both LPB and UPB branches is shown as a gradient color ellipse at k = 0. Data readapted from Dominici et al. (2015).5
2. POLARITON RABI OSCILLATIONS AND COHERENT CONTROL
A
n important peculiarity of polaritons here is at play, the so called Rabi oscillations.16,17 Indeed, a strong
coupling of the two bare oscillators, the microcavity photons (C) and the quantum well exciton (X) fields,
results also in their splitting into two normal modes of the system.
These are the upper (UPB) and lower
polariton branch (LPB) modes, which differ in energy and dephasing time (which is, mode bandwidth), and
where the two bare fields oscillate with in-phase and phase-opposition, respectively. The simultaneous excitation
of the two modes can be perceived as a time beating in their projection upon the photon and exciton basis. A
complementary point of view is the continuous transformation of photons into excitons and then back. Rabi
oscillations have been known since the early pioneering works on polaritons, but their space resolved ultrafast
imaging only recently achieved, and never before exploting the high degree of coherence as here. Typical bare
and normal modes of microcavity polaritons are shown in Fig. 1.
Cyclical exchange of excitation between two coupled modes a and b can occur at either the single particle
or many particle levels. When this occurs at the single particle level in a quantum two-level system, it provides
the ground for a qubit,19 which, if it can be further manipulated, opens the possibility to perform quantum


information processing.20 Such an oscillation is of probability amplitudes and therefore is a strongly quantum
mechanical phenomenon, that involves maximally entangled states:
|Ψ(t)⟩= α(t) |1a, 0b⟩+ β(t) |0a, 1b⟩.
(1)
The same physics also holds, not at the quantum level, but with coherent states of the fields, a situation known
in the literature as implementing an “optical atom”21 or a “classical two-level system”.22 The oscillation is then
more properly qualified as “normal mode coupling”23,24 as it is now between the fields themselves:
|ψ(t)⟩= |α(t)⟩|β(t)⟩,
(2)
rather than their probability amplitudes. The terminology of Rabi oscillations is however used also in the classical
case,25,26 such for example the purpose to realize classical bits, “cebit”.27 or other classical counterparts of the
quantum version.28 As a futher example, classical two-level systems29 were recently pursued in the rising field
of nanomechanical optics.22,30 In our case, the polariton system31 provides hence a good platform to implement
two-level dynamics at both the quantum32 and classical level.33 As said, the polariton nature itself is that of
a two-level system, giving the strong coupling regime between the cavity photon and a semiconductor exciton,
also named bare oscillators. In the specific, two-dimensional microcavities embedding inorganic quantum wells
(QWs)34 have attracted attention for their ability to reach the regime of Bose-Einstein condensation35 and
superfluidity,11,36 with a plethora of collective wavefunction phenomena hydrodynamics including coherence,
quantized vorticity, strong nonlinearities and real-space pattern formation.4,5,8,37,38 On the application side,
the most intriguing perspectives involve schemes and demonstrations for new polariton lasers39,40 and all-optical
transistors and logical operations.41
Pioneering attempts to observe the Rabi oscillations at the core of the
polariton physics, encountered intrisic difficulties represented, e.g., by their sub-ps time range and reported very
few oscillations with orders of magnitude visibility loss each cycle.42 The inhomogeneous broadening of excitons,43
not taking into account the space dephasing of the space-integrated signals, could provide a qualitative agreement
only. Later on, nonlinear pump-probe techniques,44–47 achieved a better visibility in the registration of the modes
beating but didn’t provided the necessary degree for a deeper analysis. Our recent experiments could image the
time and spatially resolved oscillations and achieve Rabi piloting by two pulse schemes able to achieve the wished
modes superposition including a polarization degree of freedom. Such schemes are of paramount importance48
also in light of the possibility to address polaritons at the single particle level.49,50
2.1 Single pulse Rabi oscillations
As shown in Fig. 1, the 130 fs long and 8 nm energy broad laser pulse spreads in energy over the two branches,
preparing the system in a bare state and not in an eigenstate, inducing oscillations between its two components.
One can see on the outer panels of Fig. 2 a typical experimental observation of the space resolved photonic
emission from the microcavity sample. As expected, the photon field arises and vanishes cyclically, during each
Rabi cycle. The different dephasing times of the two modes, suggested by the inner scheme of the figure (with
different radius of the rotating modes), is leading also to a damping of the oscillations between consecutive cycles.
Here the polaritons have quite a large spatial extension, given by the exciting laser, ≈10µm. However, given
the system is linear, presents a minimal diffusion and is not imparted by any momentum, the dynamics can be
reduced to zero dimension (i.e., the field is homogeneous and with no space reshaping, there is no exploitation
of the space degree of freedom).
Indeed, the excitation power was set at a low enough density in order to
maintain their bosonic properties in the linear regime. We could have thus access to the subpicosecond linear
Rabi oscillations through the coherent fraction |ψC(r, t)|2 of the photonic field.
To this extent, our setup can access the complex wavefunction, i.e., measuring both its amplitude and phase,
by holography, a technique of increasing use to image polariton fluids for which both of these informations are of
crucial importance.51,52 We recourse to a variation known as off-axis digital holography,53 which provides high-
quality results by separation of the diffracted images of an off-axis reference frame and the signal. We adapted it
to support ultrafast and tunable multiple-pulse experiments, as shown in Fig. 3. As such, our measurement does
not rely on nonlinear detection scheme or interactions, as in previous works,44–46 but on interferences only. The
photonic field that is accessible experimentally, have been fitted with the optical model developed in detailed
in,16 and its excitonic counterpart recovered through the polaritonic equations .


Figure 2.
Two Rabi cycles seen through the time and space resolved photonic emission (outer panels) and the scheme
of the UPB and LPB modes depiceted in the ω0 rotating frame of reference (inner panel). The time reference is given by
the central frequency between the bare modes (ω0 = ωC+ωX
2
).
2.2 Two-pulse coherent control
With such an accurate command of the system, we are able to time precisely the arrival of a second pulse and
perform a comprehensive coherent control on the coupled dynamics.
The Rabi oscillations are triggered by
sending a first pulse quite broad in energy that initiates a dominant photon or exciton fraction. One can refine
the state by sending a second pulse, similar to the first one, to any desired configurations. The delay of the
second photonic pulse can be set according to four different main preparations, depending on the combination
of the pulses’ relative delay in both the Rabi period order Φ and optical period order ϕ. For example, the Rabi
antiphase condition is achieved upon coupling the second pulse when the cavity field is empty and the state is
fully excitonic. In such case, injecting a second fully photonic pulse in optical (resp. anti-optical) phase with the
exciton, for instance, creates an LP (resp. UP), as shown in Fig. 4(a) (resp. Fig. 4(b)). The transformation of
a bare state, created by the 1st pulse, into a LPB or UPB state when the second pulse arrives, is associated to
the switching off of the Rabi oscillations, and the population decreases with the lifetime of the respective mode.
In Fig. 4(c), the second pulse is arriving during the photonic phase of the condensate (Rabi in-phase condition),
and also in optical phase with the cavity field.
This is a case of Rabi oscillations enhancement, where the
oscillations cycle is magnified with the second pulse. In the case of Fig. 4(d) instead the second pulse annihilates
the field. This is achieved by sending a pulse optically out of phase but in phase with the Rabi oscillations,
inducing destructive interferences that cancel the field intensity. All these cases demonstrate the possibility to
do coherent control of the strong light-matter coupling dynamics. Such proof of principle fully demonstrated
here also suggests that there would be no fundamental difficulty in sending more than two pulses. Interesting
perspectives are now opened, notably at the single-particle level to perform quantum information processing.


Figure 3. Experimental setup for double pulse coherent control experiments with polarization control and digital off-axis
holography imaging. The interference between the device emission and the reference arms is implemented through a
Mach-Zehnder configuration, while the two-pulse excitation is achieved in a Michelson configuration.
Figure 4. Two-pulse experiment as seen through all the theoretical variables: bare states in solid and eigenstates in dashed
lines. The experimentally available variable is the photon field, in red. The four cases correspond to: (a) switching-off
of the Rabi oscillation by bringing the state into a LPB condensate, (b) switching-off of the Rabi oscillation by bringing
the state into a UPB condensate, (c) enhancement of the oscillations and (d) annihilation of the field. Reprinted with
permission from Dominici et al. (2014).16 Copyright (2014) by the American Physical Society.
3. RABI POLARIZATION SHAPING
W
e here discuss how to generate new states of light by using this most fundamental of properties from the
polaritons, their Rabi oscillations. The realization is based on the proposal to link these two concepts of
polarized light by using the oscillating property of the microcavity polaritons. The idea is the following: a light
whose polarization is varying in time can be emitted from a microcavity by exciting it with two orthogonally


polarized pulses and with a suitable time delay between them.
Working with orthogonally polarized pulses
ensures that no interactions between the fields of different polarizations will occur. The superposition of the
oscillating fields results in the precession of the Stokes vector of the emitted light. Polaritons being particles
with finite lifetime, it results in a drift of the polarization from a circle on the Poincar´e sphere (whose radius
and position can be controlled) to a single point at long time. This leads to the generation of a new kind of
polarized light, suitable to cover selected area of the Poincar´e sphere, and possibly the whole sphere, in a range
of a few picoseconds. The effect has been demonstrated as a proof of principle with microcavity polaritons at
the femtosecond time scale in our previous work. It shows the emission of time varying polarized light, that, for
instance, can cover a whole hemisphere of the Poincar´e sphere. But as it relies on the Rabi oscillations, this effect
could be thus transposed and obtained with other platforms operating at different time scales (from attoseconds
to milliseconds) and exploiting the same property.
3.1 Polarization Shaping
The first realization of a shaped pulse produced light whose intensity, momentary frequency and light polarization
were varied as a function of time in a timescale of femtoseconds. This was reported by Brixner and Gerber in
2001.54 Thereby was opened the era of ”polarization pulse shaping” with a huge number of potential applications.
Before that, only simple polarization profiles could be achieved by using interferometric combinations of two
polarization components. It has been demonstrated by Zhuang et al. (1997)55 that a stack of three homogeneous
nematic liquid-crystal cells, or Liquid-Crystal display (LCD) could be used as a controller to bring any state
of polarization of light from one arbitrary state to another. The idea of Brixner and Gerber was thus to build
a device based on a set of many-pixel (256) two-layer LCDs to obtained a time varying polarized light, each
pixel changing the state of polarization (SOP). By applying a suitable voltage to the separated pixels, one
tune individual frequency intervals throughout the laser spectrum. The phases differences leasing to a complex
polarization-modulated laser pulses in the time domain.
The desired sequence of voltage modulations, that
correspond to the various SOPs, can be computer-controlled with a corresponding algorithm.
The range of applications is potentially huge since the interaction between light and matter is polarization
sensitive. This technique was thus used to increase the performances of many applications based on polarization.
In a later study, Brixner et al. (2004)56 reported the ionization of potassium dimer molecules, where dipole
transitions are favoured by different directions of the exciting laser field. With this example, we understand
directly the advantages of having a single laser beam whose polarization varies in time.
Polarization pulse
shaped lasers are also an efficient method for nano-optical manipulation. Aeschlimann et al. (2007)57 have
achieved subwavelength dynamic localisation of electromagnetic intensity on the nanometre scale, overcoming
the spatial restrictions of conventional optics by using adaptive polarization shaping of femtosecond laser pulses.
This technique has also been used for the generation of ultrashort laser pulse pairs, whose time delay between
them is controlled with a zeptosecond precision.58 Dozens of other further studies based on this principle have
been done in the last fifteen years, feeding a rich literature. This technique of pulse shaping allows one to reach
a huge variety of different time varying polarized pulses, but it suffers also from some limitations. The number
of SOP contained in the resulting pulse depends directly on the number of LCD, as they are independently
tuned to obtain the desired ellipticity. This cannot be enough to cover entire parts of a Poincar´e sphere. It also
requires a complex setup, involving LCDs, all-reflective zero-dispersion compressor, interferometers and computer
resources, the desired polarization being computed with special algorithms. Recent advances in polarization state
generation (PSG) involve arbitrary polarization synthesis by a plasmonic nanoantenna fed by the coherent control
of two input waveguides59 and parallel architecture based on digital micromirror devices.60
Another class of polarized beams has been theoretically developed later in order to cover the whole Poincar´e
sphere of polarization. The so-called ”Full Poincar´e Beams” have been introduced by Beckley et al. (2010)61
and consists in a superposition of a Gaussian mode and a spiral-phase Laguerre-Gauss mode having orthogonal
polarizations. In this case, and unlike the Brixner pulses, all the polarization states are displayed spatially into
the beam.
3.2 Polariton sweeping on the Poincar´e Sphere
We can now take advantage of a feature that is usually regarded as a shortcoming of microcavity polaritons, but
that in our case will turn the simple effect just proposed into a mechanism that powers a new type of light. This


Figure 5.
Experimental polarized Rabi oscillations and contro-polarized two pulse coherent control for polarization
shaping. The top two panels show the time-space charts of the polariton amplitude for the right (R, blue) and left (L,
red) circular polarization. Their Rabi oscillations remain decoupled. In the third row the spatial distributions of the
density and polarization texture at 200 fs time intervals during one of the initial cycles after the second pulse arrival. The
emitted intensity scale in each panel has been normalized to its top density but it is remains basically constant (color
scale in the bottom row chart), after the second pulse arrival On the other hand, the oscillations are transferred to the
polarization texture. The fourth, fifth and sixth panels show the time-space charts for the three Stokes parameter, S1, S2
and S3. The Rabi oscillations in such panels are clearly seen after the arrival of the second pulse. The last panel shows
the overall density. Data readapted from Colas et al. (2015).17
effect would thus provide both of the mechanisms we have mentioned before, namely (i) full Poincar´e beams,
(ii) in time. In the panels of Fig. 5 is highlighted the realization of a contro-polarized two-pulse coherent control
experiment. This is achieved through the full exploitation of the setup previously introduced, (see the details of
the two excitation arms with polarization control in Fig. 3). The top two rows in Fig. 5 report the time behavior
of the cross-section density of the polariton emission resolved in the two spin populations, right (R, blue, first
panel) and left (L, red, second panel) circular. The starting time of the two spin emission is correspondent to the
arrival of the two pulses, respectively. As it can be seen the two spin populations oscillates mutually independent,
nine or ten oscillations can be resolved before the polariton dephasing leads to the oscillations quench. Here we


have set a relative time delay to achieve the condition of anti-Rabi phase, Φ = 1.5 TR. Such half-integer value
is a good condition to transfer the density oscillations in each of the two spin to polarization oscillations. The
resulting polarization texture can be observed in the real-space maps of the third row, where the normalized
total density profile is overlapped too in a central square area of 20 x 20 µm2. The four time snapshots, at almost
regular intervals of 200 fs, corresponds to the four vertical lines of the small boxes in the upper two rows. We see
that right circular, antidiagonal linear, left circular and horizontal linear states are alternating in the ultrafast
sequence. The associated Stokes parameter are evolving in time as highlighted by the following three time-space
panels. Finally the bottom row, presenting the total density through time, shows that the initially high visibility
Rabi time fringes are strongly (yet not completely) quenched by the arrival of the second, contropolarized and
Rabi-antiphases pulse. The intensity oscillations quench can be improved upon a calibration not only of the time
delay, but also of the two pulse relative power ratio.
Now, we have already discussed the significant lifetime imbalance between the two types of polaritons. We
know that the upper polariton enjoys a much shorter lifetime than its homologue the lower polariton, regardless
of the polarization. From the fits realized on the previous Rabi experiments, we have found the upper polariton
lifetime is typically of the order of 2 ps while it is of the order of 10 ps for the lower polariton. However these
short values can be now tuned by orders of magnitudes in different samples.
As an example, microcavities
presenting particles lifetime of the order of the hundred of picoseconds have been demonstrated by M. Steger et
al. (2013).62 In our case, the lifetime imbalance between the polaritons leads to time-dependent Rabi oscillations
converging toward a monotonously decaying signal as the population of the upper polaritons ”evaporates” and
only lower polaritons remain.
The decay of the polariton fields leads to a continuous drift on the Poincar´e
sphere, starting by describing the initial circle of the Rabi dynamics in the absence of dissipation, toward a final
point defined by the polarized lower polaritons. This has, as an interesting consequence, the emission of a light
”visiting” a plethora of states of polarization. In Fig. 6 are shown two realization cases spanning different areas
of the Poincar´e sphere, which is reported as a cylindrical projextion to cartesian coordinates. One can see how
the polarization evolves, starting from the north pole line of right circular spin corresponding to the first right
polarized pulse, circles and starting to rotate over the sphere after the second, contro-polarized pulse arrival.
Each circle is drawn in one Rabi cycle which in the present case is about 800 fs. The arrows on the trajectories
follow the direction of time toward the final state, which here corresponds to almost linear polarization states
of prevalently diagonal (D, on the left, solid blue trajectory) and anti-diagonal (A, on the right, dashed red
trajectory) degree.
Figure 6. Polarization shaping experiments plotted on the cylindrical projection of the Poincar´e sphere. The polarization
oscillations are realized upon two contro-circular pulses excitation with half-integer time delay on the scale of the Rabi
period: Φ = n · 0.5 TR with n odd number. The final state has a degree of circular polarization (ellipticity) depending on
power balance, while its specific linear direction (azimuth) is set by the optical phase delay ϕ.


4. TOPOLOGY TWIST
H
ere we show how to resonantly initialize the polariton condensate with non-homogeneous space textures of
polarization, and their dynamical modification in the linear regime. In the specific, we realize a full Poincar´e
pattern such as the skyrmion, whose reshaping on time lengths of the order of the polariton lifetimes can be
described as a twist in the polarization space and reveal a wide framework of generalized skyrmions and spin
vortex states.18 Again, the recent works we show here point to the large potentialities of microcavity polaritons
and of their topological resonant excitation (e.g., associated to the presence of orbital angular momentum vortex
states with non-trivial polarization textures), whose dynamical redistribution represents a polarization shaping
approach fully exploitable in engineered microcavity devices.
On the one hand, the polarization dynamics in semiconductor microcavities is often ascribed to spin-orbital-
like coupling terms, such as the transverse-electric–transverse-magnetic (TE-TM) modes’ splitting resulting in
the so the called optical spin Hall effect.63–65 Such term can exert a precessing action on the pseudospin vector,
generating differently polarized regions even when starting from a homogeneous polarization.66,67 However in this
case, it is usually needed the presence of an imprinted or nonlinearly-activated radial or at least inhomogeneous
phase gradient, whose associated in-plane k is hence differently oriented with respect to the initial homogeneous
polarization. On the other hand, it is sometimes useful to consider also the presence of a k-independent anisotropy
term χ0 associated, e.g., to strain effects,68,69 that finally results in the dephasing between two given linear
polarizations, say x and y, and hence in the change of any non-eigenmode that can be expressed in that basis.
Such term is responsible for the polarization reshaping observed here.
The experimental realization is carried upon a modification of the previous scheme in Fig. 3. Here we use
only one of the two excitation arms on the top-left side (single pulse experiment). However, the single excitation
pulse should be thought as sculpted by two different topologies in the two spin, respectively a LG01 vortex of
unitary winding number and a Gaussian with zero azimuthal number LG00. Such configuration can be achieved
by proper use of a single q-plate,70 an anisotropic and inhomogeneous liquid-crystal device which in the last years
has unfolded a rich exploration of optical vorticity, with recent applications to full- and half-quantum vortex
dynamics in polariton condensates71 too. In the present case, the exciting pulse is represented by a laser pulse (4
ps duration and 0.5 nm bandwidth) which is tuned to selectively excite only the LPB mode. Indeed, we are not
exploting the Rabi oscillations as before, but the peculiarity of microcavity polaritons stated above, that consists
in the anisotropy splitting of linear polarizations along preferential axis of the samples. By means of polarization
control of the incoming/outgoing pulse and tuning of the q-plate, we can set a specific superposition of two LG
beams with integer or null phase winding in the two spin components: their combination is responsible for the
resultant vector vortex beam.72 One relevant field pattern that is possible to obtain, among the others, is the
skyrmion (see18), which we imprint on the photonic pulse and hence in the initial resonant polariton state. Upon
specific conditions the skyrmion corresponds to the stereographic projection of the whole Poincar´e sphere itself
(see also61), and it should be considered the full-Poincar´e beam by excellence.
Our experimental skyrmions and their reshaping have been backed-up by theory and a numerical model,
whose results are reported in Fig. 7. As shown on the left side column, projected onto the circular polarization
basis, the skyrmions are characterized by the presence of an integer phase winding (orbital angular momentum)
in one of the spin components and a zero-winding in the opposite one. The resultant vectorial field exhibits
an inhomogeneous pattern comprising all polarization states, as typical of full Poincar´e beams (see the first
panel of the central column of Fig. 7). The skyrmions possess a specific circumference of full linear polarization
(l-line) and they are fingerprinted by the inversion of the sign of circular polarization degree when crossing this
circumference in the radial direction. The l-line is conformally mapped to the equatorial loop of the Poincar´e
sphere (right column) while the inner and outer regions to such circle corresponds to the two hemispheres of
the sphere, respectively. Indeed the polarization changes from right-circular at the centre to left-circular at
large distance (or viceversa). Two fundamental types of textures can be obtained, the star-like or the lemon-like
skyrmion,18,73 depending on the winding direction along the equatorial line with respect to that in the real-space.
In any case, the radial lines in real-space map to the meridians of the sphere, while the circle lines in real-space
map to the parallels of the sphere. The conformal mapping of the polarization sphere to the real-space mantains
the angles between these lines. We point out that by moving the light point of the stereographic projection into


Figure 7.
Skyrmion twist, numerical simulation. On the left column top panels are reported the density and phase
maps of the initial two spin components (σ+ ≡R and σ−≡L) of the skyrmion. The central column reports instead the
polarization texture at initial and subsequent time snapshots, where the colour scale is proportional to the circular degree
of polarization S3. The l-line of linear polarization is reported as a dashed green circle. The three S1,2,3 Stokes degree
of polarizations at different times are plotted in the small panels on the right. Several concentric circles in real space
(each represented with a different color) are then conformally mapped onto the Poincar´e sphere on the right column.
The anisotropy splitting χ0 = 0.08 meV between the horizontal (H) and vertical (V ) polarizations produces a dynamical
twist of the whole texture on the Poincar´e sphere, leading at around 30 ps to a 90◦twisted skyrmion where the S2 and
S3 distributions in real space have roughly swapped with respect to initial time. At even longer time (∼60 ps) the 180◦
twist corresponds to a complete transmutation of the initial star skyrmion into its conjugate state (lemon skyrmion). The
effect is discussed in Donati et al. (2016).18 The two left bottom panels (χ0 = 0.02 meV) show the additional effect of
including the TE-TM splitting, which leads to a transverse shrinking and an azimuthal straining of the topological belt.
See also Supplemental Video 1.
the sphere, the skyrmion l-line would gradually move towards infinitity in real-space, obtaining the polarization
field of an infinite-size HQV,74 associated to only one emisphere.
In order to represent the dynamical behavior of our experimental observations, we used numerical computation
implementing a two-component open-dissipative Gross-Pitaevskii model describing the system, including the
anisotropy splitting term χ0. The polarization textures reshaping at four successive time frames is reported


in the central column, highlighting a complex redistribution comprising spin transport flows across the l-line.
However, the reshaping is decoupled from both the mass transport, given the linear regime, and from the (σ+)
phase singularity movement, which remains in the centre (not shown). The dynamics can be projected onto each
of the three Stokes basis for polarization states, as shown in the small panels (three for each time frame) in the
third column. At the intermediate time here shown (∼30 ps), noteworthy the S2 and S3 distributions in real
space have roughly exchanged with each other, with respect to initial time. The clearest picture of the complex
reshaping appears however upon plotting on the Poincar´e sphere, as shown in the last column. The real-space
loops of the skyrmion, which initially map to the parallels on the sphere, rotate during time around the S1
basis axis associated with the anisotropy directions in real-space (i.e., xy ≡HV ). At the latest time here shown
(∼60 ps) the twist reaches 180◦, i.e., to the reversal of the initial star skyrmion into its conjugate state (lemon
skyrmion). The complete topology-flip has exchanged R and L spin population between the inner and outer
regions to the l-line. Similar twists are observed when starting with opposite skyrmions or double-loop topologies
such as the hedgehog and hyperbolic spin vortices. The twist speed is constant over time, as the effect is linear,
independent on the density of polaritons which are leaking out of the microcavity according to an exponential
law. The normalized twist speed retrieved from the numerical simulation is about β/χ0 ∼40◦(ps · meV)−1,
as expected also by a theoretical evaluation. Moreover, such velocity is the same for any circle: the real-space
circular corona maps to a ”topological belt” which is twisting rigidly. Finally, as shown in the bottom left panels
of Fig. 7, we point out that the simultaneous presence of a finite TE-TM splitting term, is summing up to the
χ0 anisotropy, resulting in a transverse shrinking and azimuthal straining of the topological belt. This effect
would be influenced by a large density regime, given the nonlinear push of radial flows associated to finite radial
k, summing up to the azimuthal flows of the vortex charge. We hope that the visualization of the reshaping
dynamics of the full Poincar´e topology on the Poincar´e sphere itself and the description in terms of generalized
skyrmions and spin vortices can help shedding light on a variety of topology states and dynamics and in the
perspective of possible spintronics and polarization shaping technologies.
5. QUANTUM VORTICES
F
ollowing the footsteps of the previous experiments on the coherent control of the polariton Rabi oscillations
and the polariton polarization shaping, we introduced and observed the generation of Rabi-powered vortex
oscillations in real space.
This is achieved by using a series of two pulses, the first one creating a stable
vortex in the polariton condensate, and the second one disturbing the density’s homogeneity leading to the
vortex oscillations. These results can be reproduced by using standard coupled-Schr¨odinger Equations for the
polaritons, fed with the adequate initial state. The different decay sources present in the system can be added
in the Hamiltonian in order to model the oscillations damping. The system can also be solved formally and
analytical solutions can be derived. To get more insights into this dynamics, we study the evolution of the
orbital angular momentum (OAM) and see its connection with the Rabi coupling.
Unlike their classical counterparts, quantum vortices appear to be stable configurations in a superfluid.
These ”topological charges”, characterized by a quantized circulation
H
⃗v · ⃗dl = 2πh
m have been initially predicted
by Onsager in 1949 in his work on superfluid Helium. But these predictions were only widely accepted after
Feynman’s contributions in 1955. Further theoretical developments have also been made by Gross and Pitaevskii
(1961). Quantum vortices have been then observed in a wide range of systems generally described by a complex
wave function whose phase plays a key role in their dynamics. We can mention superconductors75 where the
vortex dynamics is mainly governed by the thermal and quantum fluctuations. Such vortices can be as well
manipulated by applying external forces, such as electric currents. Superconductor vortices were extensively
studied as they can carry Abrikosov vortices (fluxons) and exhibit some complex ordering like Abrikosov lattices,
spin glasses etc. Bose-Einstein Condensates (BEC) are also a good platform to generate quantum vortices since
they are superfluid systems.76 The vortex generation in a BEC has been first demonstrated by Cornell’s group
in 199977 following his previous works on BEC for which he was awarded the Nobel prize in 2001. It was later
demonstrated that vortices can even appear spontaneously during phase transitions in which the BEC formation
occurs,78 and the reconnection of vortex lines has been studied in the framework of superfluid turbulence.79
Vortex lattices were also observed in rotating BEC by the group of W. Ketterle,80 exhibiting a high vortex
lifetime (≈1min). Another interesting feature of the vortices produced in atomic BECs and related to our


polariton vortices behaviours, is their core’s precession. The phenomenon was characterized and observed by
B. P. Anderson et al. (2000)81 in a BEC made of a superposition of two internal states of 87Rb. The vortex
motion was in this case attributed to a Magnus effect applied on the vortex into the quantum fluid.
More
recently, it has been demonstrated that similarly to optical fields ,82–84 electron beams could also propagate with
a phase singularity,85 giving a new degree of freedom to the electrons. Shortly later, electron vortex beams with
high quanta of angular momentum (up to 100ℏ) were realized86,87 leading to potential applications in electron
microscopy of magnetic and biological specimens.
The polariton community was of course not left behind in the investigation of vortex experiments. Lagoudakis
et al. (2008)12 have reported the formation of pinned single quantized vortices in the Bose-condensed phase of
a polariton fluid, giving new clues to understand the superfluid nature of the polariton condensates. Quantum
half-vortices were then observed in polariton condensates88 by the same group, following their prediction by
Yu. Rubo.89The full-vortex twin-charge splitting90 dynamics pinned by defects was later observed.
We can
also mention the observation of metastable persistent polariton superflows,10 where it was shown how sustained
quantized angular momenta can be transferred to the steady-state condensate, insuring a long-lived vorticity.
The effect of the nonlinearity on the vortex size was discussed by Krizhanovskii et al.91
and by Voronova
et al. (2012).92 More elaborated topological structures were introduced, like the formation of a vortex chain,
achieved in a resonantly pumped polariton superfluid.93 A circular chain containing 8 vortices of the same charge
was generated with a Laguerre-Gauss beam, paving the way for more experiments involving self-arranged and
same-sign vortex lattices. Other recent advances on the field include the generation of unconventional states,
such as polarization textures corresponding to spin vortices in open-cavity polaritons,94 or exotic topologies (e.g.,
those referred to as generalized skyrmions in the previous section) under confined nonresonant95 and imprinted
resonant18 excitation dynamics. Intriguing 2D+t topological strings have been associated to the half-vortex
precession, together with pair generation phenomena at high density.71 In the considered polariton system, the
vortex dynamics is ruled by the interplay between the nonlinearity and the disorder landscape.
In the following, we will deal with polariton vortices in the linear regime, where the vortices are directly
imprinted to the condensate through the laser excitation. Thus, the size of the vortices in the different components
will not be affected by any nonlinearity as it the case for interacting condensates. In order to analyze the vortex
dynamics, will also focus on the OAM value for the different polariton components. Several applications are
based on the OAM properties. For example, quantum correlations between the OAM variables can be used in
quantum information96s processing and notably in protocols for quantum key distribution.97 The OAM based
multiplexing was developed and used to increase the efficiency of millimetre-wave wireless communications98
and to confer robustness to free-space communications,99 with demonstration of high accuracy transmission over
distances of more than 100 km.100 Compact plasmonic metasurfaces can be designed for the spin-orbit coupling
conversion of the spin into an arbitrary OAM photonic vortex,101 while new classes of lasers have been proposed
to generate all the states of an higher-order Poincar´e sphere.102
The data exchanged between OAM beams
was reported to reaches Terabit rates values in free-space transmission103 and fibers,104 and recently a scheme
for the time-division multiplexing of photonic pulses carrying different orbital angular momentum has been
introduced.105 Topological light was also proposed to study new selection rules and manipulation of the ionized
state in photoionization processes,106 thus enriching the scenarios of femtochemistry. Proposals of polariton
vortices for information processing107 have been made as well as a scheme for gyroscopes108 that exploits the
macroscopic response of the system to small perturbations to create sensitive devices.
5.1 Swirling Rabi vortices
We have already said that vortex oscillations can be obtained by sending a Gaussian pulse on an unperturbed
vortex, the vortex core oscillating circularly into the beam. We have experimentally observed polariton vortex
oscillations that are rapidly damped after a few picoseconds, the vortex becoming immobile again. As the vortex
oscillations are powered by the Rabi oscillations between the photonic and excitonic field, we suspect that the
lifetime imbalance between the upper and lower polaritons plays as well a key role in this mechanism.
The system can be simply modeled by two coupled-Schr¨odinger Equations to which we add the excitation
scheme, i.e. a Laguerre-Gauss pulse (carrying the vortex phase singularity) followed by a Gaussian pulse. One
can see in Fig. 8(a) the basic vortex dynamics obtained from the computational model. Here, the Laguerre-Gauss


Figure 8.
Vortex oscillations generated by perturbing the system, that was initially prepared in a vortex state, with
a Gaussian pulse sent at t = t02 ≈4ps. The vortex trajectory in the photonic (excitonic) field is plotted in red (blue)
and also in the upper (lower) field in purple (green). The wave function intensity |ψC| is plotted in the x −y plane for
a t > t02, where are as well projected the vortex trajectories. (a) Conservative case, without including decay. After
the second pulse, the vortices in both fields describe circles with a non constant angular velocity. (b) Adding the upper
polariton decay, it results in a damping of the oscillations at the rate of the UP decay.
pulse is sent at early time to generate the vortex, and the Gaussian pulse is sent at t02 ≈4ps. After the first
pulse, the vortex is perfectly centered into the beam and motionless. After the second pulse, the minimum of
intensity no longer remains in the center of the beam, as shown on the density plot, which induces the vortex
oscillations. The dynamical position of the vortex is displayed with a 3D curve for both photonic (in red) and
excitonic fields (in blue). The vortices trajectory in space and time looks helical but it is actually not, the angular
velocity varying periodically in time. The two vortices, in the photon and in the exciton, rotates around each
other at the Rabi frequency similarly to a Newton’s cradle, one vortex slowing down while the other accelerates.
In the case of Fig. 8(b) the upper polariton lifetime was included in the Hamiltonian. The vortex precession now
follows a spiral whose radius damping corresponds to the UP lifetime, here 4ps. The vortex in both photonic and
excitonic field converges towards the same fixed point. To understand these vortex motions, it is interesting to
look at the vortex behaviours through the eigenstates of the system, namely by looking at the polaritonic fields
ψ+ and ψ−which are obtained by combining the bare states. The vortex trajectories in the polaritonic fields are
plotted with green (lower) and purple (upper) lines in Fig. 8. Before the Gaussian pulse, the vortex is located
in the center of the beam for all the fields. After the second pulse, we see that unlike in the photon and exciton
fields, into which the vortex oscillates, it is simply shifted to the periphery of the beam in the polaritonic fields,
without exhibiting any oscillations. In the damped case, we see now clearly that as the upper field is dying,
the vortex in the photon/exciton field converges toward the position of the lower one. We know now that the
oscillations occur because the vortex of the polaritonic fields are shifted at different position into the beam, the
vortex in the photon/exciton components oscillating between them. Yet the vortex oscillations are located close
to the vortex position in the LP, possibly due to the mass imbalance between the two fields.
More insight of the vortex dynamics can be obtained by looking at the value of the OAM for the different fields.
For the polaritons, the OAM is conserved through the sum of the OAM of each sub-fields (photon/exciton), which
allows the OAM of the individual fields to vary. In any case d(⟨bL⟩ψC + ⟨bL⟩ψX)/dt has to be 0. The total number
of particles Nψ is similarly conserved through the sum of the different components NψC +NψX. However, it is not
the case for the OAM per particle defined as the ratio lψ = ⟨L⟩ψ/Nψ. In order to illustrate these conservation


Figure 9.
Numerical dynamics of a topological two-pulse excitation.
Various OAM computed from the two-pulse
experiment simulation data, corresponding to the case of a first Gaussian pulse and a second Vortex pulse. (a) Fields
intensities. (b) Angular Momentum for the different fields. (c) Angular momentum per particle, normalized in units of ℏ.
See the legend on the right bottom corner for the color code of the operators b
A(⟨L⟩, N or l) applied to the corresponding
field. The conserved quantity are plotted in orange.
rules, we have computed the different OAM for the conservative case of the oscillating vortex created with
two pulses (see Fig. 8(a)). One can see in Fig. 9(a) the time evolution of the fields intensities Nψ. The bare
fields ψC (in red) and ψX (in blue) exhibit Rabi oscillations while the polaritonic fields ψ+ (in purple) and ψ−
(in green) do not. The different intensities of course increase after the second pulse arrival, the system being
filled with more particles. The conserved quantities are plotted in orange. The OAM is plotted in (b) for the
different fields. One can see that the OAM of the bare fields oscillates exactly between the OAM’s steady value
of the polaritonic fields. The OAM for the different fields is not be affected by the second pulse, that initiates
the vortex oscillations process. Which makes sense considering that the Gaussian does not carry additional
angular momentum. Nevertheless, the vortex oscillations appear more explicitly when one computes the OAM
per particle for the different fields, as plotted in (c). When the vortices are exactly in the center of the beam,
that is before the second pulse, the angular momentum per particle is exactly quantized to one unit of ℏ. After
the second pulse, the vortices in the polariton fields do not oscillate but are displaced to a fixed position on the
periphery of the beam (see purple and green lines in Fig. 8), with a corresponding value of l which is lower than
1. As mentioned by Pitaevskii and Stringari,109 for a vortex core displaced from the center of the beam, the
OAM per particle takes a value lower than 1, the axial symmetry of the problem being lost. Here, the polaritonic
vortices are symmetrically displaced into the beam, lψ+ and lψ−thus share the same value. In the photonic and
excitonic fields, the vortices oscillate from the center to the periphery in circle, so that the variation range of the
OAM per particle oscillations is constant. Since the vortex motion is directly powered by the Rabi oscillations,
we expect that the accurate control of these new topological strings could be achieved in the same way that we
performed the control of the quantum state or the polarization state in our previous experiments.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge Romuald Houdr´e for the growth of the microcavity polariton device and Alberto Bramati for
the related know-how, Lorenzo Marrucci and Bruno Piccirillo for the q-plate devices and the related know-how.
We acknowledge the project ERC POLAFLOW (Grant 308136) for financial support.


REFERENCES
[1] Byrnes, T., Kim, N. Y., and Yamamoto, Y., “Exciton-polariton condensates,” Nat. Phys. 10(11), 803–813
(2014).
[2] Kasprzak, J., Richard, M., Kundermann, S., Baas, A., Jeambrun, P., Keeling, J. M. J., Marchetti, F. M.,
Szyma´nska, M. H., Andr´e, R., Staehli, J. L., Savona, V., Littlewood, P. B., Deveaud, B., and Dang, L. S.,
“Bose-Einstein condensation of exciton polaritons.,” Nature 443(7110), 409–414 (2006).
[3] Balili, R., Hartwell, V., Snoke, D., Pfeiffer, L., and West, K., “Bose-Einstein condensation of microcavity
polaritons in a trap,” Science 316(5827), 1007–1010 (2007).
[4] Whittaker, C. E., Dzurnak, B., Egorov, O. A., Buonaiuto, G., Walker, P. M., Cancellieri, E., Whittaker,
D. M., Clarke, E., Gavrilov, S. S., Skolnick, M. S., and Krizhanovskii, D. N., “Polariton pattern formation
and its statistical properties in a semiconductor microcavity,” arXiv:1612.03048 [cond-mat] (2016). arXiv:
1612.03048.
[5] Dominici, L., Petrov, M., Matuszewski, M., Ballarini, D., De Giorgi, M., Colas, D., Cancellieri, E.,
Silva Fern´andez, B., Bramati, A., Gigli, G., Kavokin, A., Laussy, F., and Sanvitto, D., “Real-space collapse
of a polariton condensate,” Nat. Commun. 6, 8993 (2015).
[6] Dreismann, A., Cristofolini, P., Balili, R., Christmann, G., Pinsker, F., Berloff, N. G., Hatzopoulos, Z.,
Savvidis, P. G., and Baumberg, J. J., “Coupled counterrotating polariton condensates in optically defined
annular potentials,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111(24), 8770–8775 (2014).
[7] Roumpos, G., Lohse, M., Nitsche, W. H., Keeling, J., Szyma´nska, M. H., Littlewood, P. B., L¨offler, A.,
H¨ofling, S., Worschech, L., Forchel, A., and Yamamoto, Y., “Power-law decay of the spatial correlation
function in exciton-polariton condensates,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109(17), 6467–6472 (2012).
[8] Amo, A., Pigeon, S., Sanvitto, D., Sala, V. G., Hivet, R., Carusotto, I., Pisanello, F., Lem´enager, G.,
Houdr´e, R., Giacobino, E., Ciuti, C., and Bramati, A., “Polariton superfluids reveal quantum hydrody-
namic solitons.,” Science 332(6034), 1167–1170 (2011).
[9] Pigeon, S., Carusotto, I., and Ciuti, C., “Hydrodynamic nucleation of vortices and solitons in a resonantly
excited polariton superfluid,” Phys. Rev. B 83(14), 144513 (2011).
[10] Sanvitto, D., Marchetti, F. M., Szyma´nska, M. H., Tosi, G., Baudisch, M., Laussy, F. P., Krizhanovskii,
D. N., Skolnick, M. S., Marrucci, L., Lemaˆıtre, A., Bloch, J., Tejedor, C., and Vi˜na, L., “Persistent currents
and quantized vortices in a polariton superfluid,” Nat. Phys. 6(7), 527–533 (2010).
[11] Amo, A., Lefr`ere, J., Pigeon, S., Adrados, C., Ciuti, C., Carusotto, I., Houdr´e, R., Giacobino, E., and Bra-
mati, A., “Superfluidity of polaritons in semiconductor microcavities,” Nat. Phys. 5(11), 805–810 (2009).
[12] Lagoudakis, K. G., Wouters, M., Richard, M., Baas, A., Carusotto, I., Andr´e, R., Dang, L. S., and
Deveaud-Pl´edran, B., “Quantized vortices in an exciton-polariton condensate,” Nat. Phys. 4(9), 706–710
(2008).
[13] Manni, F., Lagoudakis, K. G., Para¨ıso, T. K., Cerna, R., L´eger, Y., Liew, T. C. H., Shelykh, I. A., Kavokin,
A. V., Morier-Genoud, F., and Deveaud-Pl´edran, B., “Spin-to-orbital angular momentum conversion in
semiconductor microcavities,” Phys. Rev. B 83, 241307 (2011).
[14] Toledo-Solano, M., Mora-Ramos, M. E., Figueroa, A., and Rubo, Y. G., “Warping and interactions of
vortices in exciton-polariton condensates,” Phys. Rev. B 89, 035308 (2014).
[15] Flayac, H., Shelykh, I. A., Solnyshkov, D. D., and Malpuech, G., “Topological stability of the half-vortices
in spinor exciton-polariton condensates,” Phys. Rev. B 81, 045318 (2010).
[16] Dominici, L., Colas, D., Donati, S., Restrepo Cuartas, J. P., De Giorgi, M., Ballarini, D., Guirales, G.,
L´opez Carre´no, J. C., Bramati, A., Gigli, G., del Valle, E., Laussy, F. P., and Sanvitto, D., “Ultrafast
control and Rabi oscillations of polaritons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 226401 (2014).
[17] Colas, D., Dominici, L., Donati, S., Pervishko, A. A., Liew, T. C., Shelykh, I. A., Ballarini, D., De Giorgi,
M., Bramati, A., Gigli, G., Valle, E. d., Laussy, F. P., Kavokin, A. V., and Sanvitto, D., “Polarization
shaping of Poincar´e beams by polariton oscillations,” Light Sci. Appl. 4(11), e350 (2015).
[18] Donati, S., Dominici, L., Dagvadorj, G., Ballarini, D., De Giorgi, M., Bramati, A., Gigli, G., Rubo, Y. G.,
Szyma´nska, M. H., and Sanvitto, D., “Twist of generalized skyrmions and spin vortices in a polariton
superfluid,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113(52), 14926–14931 (2016).
[19] Schumacher, B., “Quantum coding,” Phys. Rev. A 51, 2738 (1995).


[20] Nielsen, M. A. and Chuang, I. L., [Quantum computation and quantum information], Cambridge University
Press (2000).
[21] Spreeuw, R. and Woerdman, J., “Optical atoms,” Progress in Optics 31, 263 (1993).
[22] Faust, T., Rieger, J., Seitner, M. J., Kotthaus, J. P., and Weig, E. M., “Coherent control of a classical
nanomechanical two-level system,” Nat. Phys. 9, 485 (2013).
[23] Zhu, Y., Gauthier, D. J., Morin, S. E., Wu, Q., Carmichael, H. J., and Mossberg, T. W., “Vacuum Rabi
splitting as a feature of linear-dispersion theory: Analysis and experimental observations,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 64, 2499 (1990).
[24] Khitrova, G., Gibbs, H. M., Kira, M., Koch, S. W., and Scherer, A., “Vacuum Rabi splitting in semicon-
ductors,” Nat. Phys. 2, 81 (2006).
[25] Matthews, M. R., Anderson, B. P., Haljan, P. C., Hall, D. S., Holland, M. J., Williams, J. E., Wieman,
C. E., and Cornell, E. A., “Watching a superfluid untwist itself: Recurrence of Rabi oscillations in a
Bose–Einstein condensate,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3358 (1999).
[26] Vasa, P., Wang, W., Pomraenke, R., Lammers, M., Maiuri, M., Manzoni, C., Cerullo, G., and Lienau, C.,
“Real-time observation of ultrafast Rabi oscillations between excitons and plasmons in metal nanostructures
with J-aggregates,” Nat. Photon. 7, 128 (2013).
[27] Spreeuw, R. J. C., “A classical analogy of entanglement,” Found. Phys. 28, 361 (1998).
[28] Dragoman, D. and Dragoman, M., [Quantum-Classical Analogies], The Frontiers Collection, Springer
(2004).
[29] Spreeuw, R. J. C., van Druten, N. J., Beijersbergen, M. W., Eliel, E. R., and Woerdman, J. P., “Classical
realization of a strongly driven two-level system,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2642 (1990).
[30] Okamoto, H., Gourgout, A., Chang, C.-Y., Onomitsu, K., Mahboob, I., Chang, E. Y., and Yamaguchi, H.,
“Coherent phonon manipulation in coupled mechanical resonators,” Nat. Phys. 9, 480 (2013).
[31] Kavokin, A., Baumberg, J. J., Malpuech, G., and Laussy, F. P., [Microcavities], Oxford University Press,
2 ed. (2011).
[32] Hennessy, K., Badolato, A., Winger, M., Gerace, D., Atature, M., Gulde, S., F˘alt, S., Hu, E. L., and
˘Imamo¯glu, A., “Quantum nature of a strongly coupled single quantum dot–cavity system,” Nature 445,
896 (2007).
[33] Weisbuch, C., Nishioka, M., Ishikawa, A., and Arakawa, Y., “Observation of the coupled exciton-photon
mode splitting in a semiconductor quantum microcavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 3314 (1992).
[34] Carusotto, I. and Ciuti, C., “Quantum fluids of light,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 299 (2013).
[35] Kasprzak, J., Richard, M., Kundermann, S., Baas, A., Jeambrun, P., Keeling, J. M. J., Marchetti, F. M.,
Szymanska, M. H., Andr´e, R., Staehli, J. L., Savona, V., Littlewood, P. B., Deveaud, B., and Le Si Dang,
“Bose–Einstein condensation of exciton polaritons,” Nature 443, 409 (2006).
[36] Amo, A., Sanvitto, D., Laussy, F. P., Ballarini, D., del Valle, E., Martin, M. D., Lemaˆıtre, A., Bloch, J.,
Krizhanovskii, D. N., Skolnick, M. S., Tejedor, C., and Vi˜na, L., “Collective fluid dynamics of a polariton
condensate in a semiconductor microcavity,” Nature 457, 291 (2009).
[37] Liew, T. C. H., Kavokin, A. V., and Shelykh, I. A., “Optical circuits based on polariton neurons in
semiconductor microcavities,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 016402 (2008).
[38] Amo, A., Liew, T. C. H., Adrados, C., Houdr´e, R., Giacobino, E., Kavokin, A. V., and Bramati, A.,
“Exciton-polariton spin switches,” Nat. Photon. 4, 361 (2010).
[39] Baumberg, J. J., Kavokin, A. V., Christopoulos, S., Grundy, A. J. D., Butt´e, R., Christmann, G., Sol-
nyshkov, D. D., Malpuech, G., von H¨ogersthal, G. B. H., Feltin, E., Carlin, J.-F., and Grandjean, N.,
“Spontaneous polarization buildup in a room-temperature polariton laser,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 136409
(2008).
[40] Schneider, C., Rahimi-Iman, A., Kim, N. Y., Fischer, J., Savenko, I. G., Amthor, M., Lermer, M., Wolf,
A., Worschech, L., Kulakovskii, V. D., Shelykh, I. A., Kamp, M., Reitzenstein, S., Forchel, A., Yamamoto,
Y., and H¨ofling, S., “An electrically pumped polariton laser,” Nature 497, 348 (2013).
[41] Ballarini, D., De Giorgi, M., Cancellieri, E., Houdr´e, R., Giacobino, E., Cingolani, R., Bramati, A., Gigli,
G., and Sanvitto, D., “All-optical polariton transistor.,” Nat. Commun. 4, 1778 (2013).


[42] Norris, T., Rhee, J.-K., Sung, C.-Y., Arakawa, Y., Nishioka, M., and Weisbuch, C., “Time-resolved vacuum
Rabi oscillations in a semiconductor quantum microcavity,” Phys. Rev. B 50, 14663 (1994).
[43] Savona, V. and Weisbuch, C., “Theory of time-resolved light emission from polaritons in a semiconductor
microcavity under resonant excitation,” Phys. Rev. B 54, 10835 (1996).
[44] Wang, H., Shah, J., Damen, T. C., Jan, W. Y., Cunningham, J. E., Hong, M., and Mannaerts, J. P.,
“Coherent oscillations in semiconductor microcavities,” Phys. Rev. B 51, 14713 (1995).
[45] Marie, X., Renucci, P., Dubourg, S., Amand, T., Jeune, P. L., Barrau, J., Bloch, J., and Planel, R.,
“Coherent control of exciton polaritons in a semiconductor microcavity,” Phys. Rev. B 59, 2494(R) (1999).
[46] Huynh, A., Tignon, J., Roussignol, P., Delalande, C., Andr´e, R., Romestain, R., and D. Le Si Dang,
“Coherent dynamics of microcavity polaritons in the nonlinear regime,” Physica E 13, 427 (2002).
[47] Brunetti, A., Vladimirova, M., Scalbert, D., Nawrocki, M., Kavokin, A. V., Shelykh, I. A., and Bloch, J.,
“Observation of spin beats at the Rabi frequency in microcavities,” Phys. Rev. B 74, 241101(R) (2006).
[48] Ridolfo, A., Vilardi, R., Di Stefano, O., Portolan, S., and Savasta, S., “All Optical Switch of Vacuum Rabi
Oscillations: The Ultrafast Quantum Eraser,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 013601 (2011).
[49] Boulier, T., Bamba, M., Amo, A., Adrados, C., Lemaˆıtre, A., Galopin, E., Sagnes, I., Bloch, J., Ciuti, C.,
Giacobino, E., and Bramati, A., “Polariton-generated intensity squeezing in semiconductor micropillars,”
Nat. Commun. 5 (2014).
[50] Cuevas, A., Silva, B., Carre˜no, J. C. L., De Giorgi, M., Mu˜noz, C. S., Fieramosca, A., Forero, D. G. S.,
Cardano, F., Marrucci, L., Tasco, V., Biasiol, G., del Valle, E., Dominici, L., Ballarini, D., Gigli, G.,
Mataloni, P., Laussy, F. P., Sciarrino, F., and Sanvitto, D., “Entangling a polariton with one photon: effect
of interactions at the single-particle level,” arXiv:1609.01244 [cond-mat, physics:physics, physics:quant-ph]
(2016). arXiv: 1609.01244.
[51] Nardin, G., Grosso, G., L´eger, Y., Pi¸etka, B., Morier-Genoud, F., and Deveaud-Pl´edran, B., “Hydrody-
namic nucleation of quantized vortex pairs in a polariton quantum fluid,” Nat. Phys. 7, 635–641 (2011).
[52] Ant´on, C., Tosi, G., Mart´ın, M. D., Vi˜na, L., Lemaˆıtre, A., and Bloch, J., “Role of supercurrents on
vortices formation in polariton condensates,” Opt. Express 20(15), 16366 (2012).
[53] Schnars, U. and J¨uptner, W., [Digital Holography], Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2005).
[54] Brixner, T. and Gerber, G., “Femtosecond polarization pulse shaping,” Opt. Lett. 26(8), 557 (2001).
[55] Zhuang, Z., Suh, S.-W., and Patel, J. S., “Polarization controller using nematic liquid crystals,” Opt.
Lett. 24(10), 694 (1999).
[56] Brixner, T., Krampert, G., Pfeifer, T., Selle, R., Gerber, G., Wollenhaupt, M., Graefe, O., Horn, C., Liese,
D., and Baumert, T., “Quantum Control by Ultrafast Polarization Shaping,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 92(20)
(2004).
[57] Aeschlimann, M., Bauer, M., Bayer, D., Brixner, T., Garc´ıa de Abajo, F. J., Pfeiffer, W., Rohmer, M.,
Spindler, C., and Steeb, F., “Adaptive subwavelength control of nano-optical fields,” Nature 446(7133),
301–304 (2007).
[58] K¨ohler, J., Wollenhaupt, M., Bayer, T., Sarpe, C., and Baumert, T., “Zeptosecond precision pulse shaping,”
Opt. Express 19(12), 11638 (2011).
[59] Rodr´ıguez-Fortu˜no, F. J., Puerto, D., Griol, A., Bellieres, L., Mart´ı, J., and Mart´ınez, A., “Universal
method for the synthesis of arbitrary polarization states radiated by a nanoantenna: Synthezising arbitrary
polarization states with a single nanoantenna,” Laser Photon. Rev. 8, L27–L31 (May 2014).
[60] She, A. and Capasso, F., “Parallel Polarization State Generation,” Sci. Rep. 6, 26019 (May 2016).
[61] Beckley, A. M., Brown, T. G., and Alonso, M. A., “Full Poincar´e beams,” Opt. Express 18(10), 10777
(2010).
[62] Steger, M., Liu, G., Nelsen, B., Gautham, C., Snoke, D. W., Balili, R., Pfeiffer, L., and West, K., “Long-
range ballistic motion and coherent flow of long-lifetime polaritons,” Phys. Rev. B 88, 235314 (2013).
[63] Kavokin, A., Malpuech, G., and Glazov, M., “Optical spin Hall effect,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 136601 (Sep
2005).
[64] Leyder, C., Romanelli, M., Karr, J. P., Giacobino, E., Liew, T. C. H., Glazov, M. M., Kavokin, A. V.,
Malpuech, G., and Bramati, A., “Observation of the optical spin Hall effect,” Nat. Phys. 3, 628–631 (Sept.
2007).


[65] Kammann, E., Liew, T. C. H., Ohadi, H., Cilibrizzi, P., Tsotsis, P., Hatzopoulos, Z., Savvidis, P. G.,
Kavokin, A. V., and Lagoudakis, P. G., “Nonlinear optical spin Hall effect and long-range spin transport
in polariton lasers,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 036404 (Jul 2012).
[66] Cilibrizzi, P., Sigurdsson, H., Liew, T. C. H., Ohadi, H., Askitopoulos, A., Brodbeck, S., Schneider, C.,
Shelykh, I. A., H¨ofling, S., Ruostekoski, J., and Lagoudakis, P., “Half-skyrmion spin textures in polariton
microcavities,” Phys. Rev. B 94, 045315 (Jul 2016).
[67] Cilibrizzi, P., Sigurdsson, H., Liew, T. C. H., Ohadi, H., Wilkinson, S., Askitopoulos, A., Shelykh, I. A.,
and Lagoudakis, P. G., “Polariton spin whirls,” Phys. Rev. B 92, 155308 (Oct 2015).
[68] Balili, R., Nelsen, B., Snoke, D. W., Reid, R. H., Pfeiffer, L., and West, K., “Huge splitting of polariton
states in microcavities under stress,” Phys. Rev. B 81 (Mar. 2010).
[69] Klopotowski, L., Mart´ın, M., Amo, A., Vi˜na, L., Shelykh, I., Glazov, M., Malpuech, G., Kavokin, A., and
Andr´e, R., “Optical anisotropy and pinning of the linear polarization of light in semiconductor microcavi-
ties,” Solid State Commun. 139, 511–515 (Sept. 2006).
[70] Cardano, F., Karimi, E., Slussarenko, S., Marrucci, L., de Lisio, C., and Santamato, E., “Polarization
pattern of vector vortex beams generated by q-plates with different topological charges,” Appl. Opt. 51,
C1–C6 (Apr 2012).
[71] Dominici, L., Dagvadorj, G., Fellows, J. M., Ballarini, D., De Giorgi, M., Marchetti, F. M., Piccirillo,
B., Marrucci, L., Bramati, A., Gigli, G., Szyma´nska, M. H., and Sanvitto, D., “Vortex and half-vortex
dynamics in a nonlinear spinor quantum fluid,” Sci. Adv. 1(11), e1500807 (2015).
[72] Schulz, S. A., Machula, T., Karimi, E., and Boyd, R. W., “Integrated multi vector vortex beam generator,”
Opt. Express 21(13), 16130 (2013).
[73] Bouchard, F., Larocque, H., Yao, A. M., Travis, C., De Leon, I., Rubano, A., Karimi, E., Oppo, G.-L.,
and Boyd, R. W., “Polarization Shaping for Control of Nonlinear Propagation,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 117(23)
(2016).
[74] Rubo, Y. G., “Half vortices in exciton polariton condensates,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 106401 (Sept. 2007).
[75] Blatter, G., Feigel’man, M. V., Geshkenbein, V. B., Larkin, A. I., and Vinokur, V. M., “Vortices in
high-temperature superconductors,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 66(4), 1125–1388 (1994).
[76] Leggett, A. J., “Superfluidity,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 71(2), S318–S323 (1999).
[77] Matthews, M. R., Anderson, B. P., Haljan, P. C., Hall, D. S., Wieman, C. E., and Cornell, E. A., “Vortices
in a Bose–Einstein condensate,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 2498 (1999).
[78] Weiler, C. N., Neely, T. W., Scherer, D. R., Bradley, A. S., Davis, M. J., and Anderson, B. P., “Spontaneous
vortices in the formation of Bose-Einstein condensates,” Nature 455(7215), 948–951 (2008).
[79] Bewley, G. P., Paoletti, M. S., Sreenivasan, K. R., and Lathrop, D. P., “Characterization of reconnecting
vortices in superfluid helium,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 105(37), 13707–13710 (2008).
[80] Abo-Shaeer, J. R., Raman, C., Vogels, J. M., and Ketterle, W., “Observation of Vortex Lattices in Bose-
Einstein Condensates,” Science 292(5516), 476–479 (2001).
[81] Anderson, B. P., Haljan, P. C., Wieman, C. E., and Cornell, E. A., “Vortex Precession in Bose-Einstein
Condensates: Observations with Filled and Empty Cores,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 85(14), 2857–2860 (2000).
[82] Yao, A. M. and Padgett, M. J., “Orbital angular momentum: origins, behavior and applications,” Adv.
Opt. Photonics 3(2), 161 (2011).
[83] Franke-Arnold, S., Allen, L., and Padgett, M., “Advances in optical angular momentum,” Laser Photon.
Rev. 2(4), 299–313 (2008).
[84] Molina-Terriza, G., Torres, J. P., and Torner, L., “Twisted photons,” Nat. Phys. 3(5), 305–310 (2007).
[85] Uchida, M. and Tonomura, A., “Generation of electron beams carrying orbital angular momentum,” Na-
ture 464(7289), 737–739 (2010).
[86] McMorran, B. J., Agrawal, A., Anderson, I. M., Herzing, A. A., Lezec, H. J., McClelland, J. J., and Unguris,
J., “Electron Vortex Beams with High Quanta of Orbital Angular Momentum,” Science 331(6014), 192–195
(2011).
[87] Grillo, V., Gazzadi, G. C., Mafakheri, E., Frabboni, S., Karimi, E., and Boyd, R. W., “Holographic
Generation of Highly Twisted Electron Beams,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 114(3) (2015).


[88] Lagoudakis, K. G., Ostatnick´y, T., Kavokin, A. V., Rubo, Y. G., Andr´e, R., and Deveaud-Pl´edran, B.,
“Observation of half-quantum vortices in an exciton-polariton condensate,” Science 326(5955), 974–976
(2009).
[89] Rubo, Y., “Half vortices in exciton polariton condensates,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99(10), 106401 (2007).
[90] Manni, F., Lagoudakis, K., and Liew, T. C. H., “Dissociation dynamics of singly charged vortices into
half-quantum vortex pairs,” Nat. Commun. 3, 1309 (2012).
[91] Krizhanovskii, D. N., Whittaker, D. M., Bradley, R. A., Guda, K., Sarkar, D., Sanvitto, D., Vi˜na, L.,
Cerda, E., Santos, P., Biermann, K., Hey, R., and Skolnick, M. S., “Effect of interactions on vortices in a
nonequilibrium polariton condensate,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 126402 (2010).
[92] Voronova, N. S. and Lozovik, Y. E., “Excitons in cores of exciton-polariton vortices,” Phys. Rev. B 86,
195305 (2012).
[93] Boulier, T., Ter¸cas, H., Solnyshkov, D. D., Glorieux, Q., Giacobino, E., Malpuech, G., and Bramati, A.,
“Vortex Chain in a Resonantly Pumped Polariton Superfluid,” Sci. Rep. 5 (2015).
[94] Dufferwiel, S., Li, F., Cancellieri, E., Giriunas, L., Trichet, A. A. P., Whittaker, D. M., Walker, P. M., Fras,
F., Clarke, E., Smith, J. M., Skolnick, M. S., and Krizhanovskii, D. N., “Spin Textures of Exciton-Polaritons
in a Tunable Microcavity with Large TE-TM Splitting,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 246401 (2015).
[95] Liu, G., Snoke, D. W., Daley, A., Pfeiffer, L. N., and West, K., “A new type of half-quantum circulation
in a macroscopic polariton spinor ring condensate,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112(9), 2676–2681 (2015).
[96] Nagali, E., Sansoni, L., Sciarrino, F., De Martini, F., Marrucci, L., Piccirillo, B., Karimi, E., and Santam-
ato, E., “Optimal quantum cloning of orbital angular momentum photon qubits through Hong-Ou-Mandel
coalescence,” Nat. Photon. 3(12), 720–723 (2009).
[97] Leach, J., Jack, B., Romero, J., Jha, A. K., Yao, A. M., Franke-Arnold, S., Ireland, D. G., Boyd, R. W.,
Barnett, S. M., and Padgett, M. J., “Quantum Correlations in Optical Angle-Orbital Angular Momentum
Variables,” Science 329(5992), 662–665 (2010).
[98] Yan, Y., Xie, G., Lavery, M. P. J., Huang, H., Ahmed, N., Bao, C., Ren, Y., Cao, Y., Li, L., Zhao, Z.,
Molisch, A. F., Tur, M., Padgett, M. J., and Willner, A. E., “High-capacity millimetre-wave communica-
tions with orbital angular momentum multiplexing,” Nat. Commun. 5, 4876 (2014).
[99] Paterson, C., “Atmospheric Turbulence and Orbital Angular Momentum of Single Photons for Optical
Communication,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 94(15) (2005).
[100] Krenn, M., Handsteiner, J., Fink, M., Fickler, R., Ursin, R., Malik, M., and Zeilinger, A., “Twisted light
transmission over 143 km,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113(48), 13648–13653 (2016).
[101] Bouchard, F., De Leon, I., Schulz, S. A., Upham, J., Karimi, E., and Boyd, R. W., “Optical spin-to-orbital
angular momentum conversion in ultra-thin metasurfaces with arbitrary topological charges,” Appl. Phys.
Lett. 105(10), 101905 (2014).
[102] Naidoo, D., Roux, F. S., Dudley, A., Litvin, I., Piccirillo, B., Marrucci, L., and Forbes, A., “Controlled
generation of higher-order Poincar˜A© sphere beams from a laser,” Nat. Photon. 10(5), 327–332 (2016).
[103] Wang, J., Yang, J.-Y., Fazal, I. M., Ahmed, N., Yan, Y., Huang, H., Ren, Y., Yue, Y., Dolinar, S.,
Tur, M., and Willner, A. E., “Terabit free-space data transmission employing orbital angular momentum
multiplexing,” Nat. Photon. 6(7), 488–496 (2012).
[104] Bozinovic, N., Yue, Y., Ren, Y., Tur, M., Kristensen, P., Huang, H., Willner, A. E., and Ramachandran,
S., “Terabit-Scale Orbital Angular Momentum Mode Division Multiplexing in Fibers,” Science 340(6140),
1545–1548 (2013).
[105] Karimi, E., Marrucci, L., de Lisio, C., and Santamato, E., “Time-division multiplexing of the orbital
angular momentum of light,” Opt. Lett. 37(2), 127 (2012).
[106] Pic´on, A., Mompart, J., V´azquez de Aldana, J. R., Plaja, L., Calvo, G. F., and Roso, L., “Photoionization
with orbital angular momentum beams,” Opt. Express 18(4), 3660 (2010).
[107] Sigurdsson, H., Egorov, O. A., Ma, X., Shelykh, I. A., and Liew, T. C. H., “Information processing with
topologically protected vortex memories in exciton-polariton condensates,” Phys. Rev. B 90, 014504 (2014).
[108] Franchetti, G., Berloff, N. G., and Baumberg, J. J., “Exploiting quantum coherence of polaritons for ultra
sensitive detectors,” arXiv:1210.1187 [cond-mat] (2012). arXiv: 1210.1187.
[109] Pitaevskii, L. and Stringari, S., [Bose-Einstein Condensation], Oxford University Press (2003).
