Title: bbb manuscript reformat_Unisci

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.19157v1

Published Time: Wed, 22 Jul 2026 01:08:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in  Operative 

# Semiconductor Devices 

Adriano Cola 1, *, Antonio Valletta 2, Isabella Farella 1, Vaclav Dědič 3, Lorenzo Dominici 4, * 

> 1

CNR IMM, Institute for Microelectronics and Microsystems, Via Monteroni, 73100 Lecce, Italy  

> 2

CNR IMM, Institute for Microelectronics and Microsystems, Via Del Fosso Del Cavaliere, 100, 

00133 Roma, Italy  

> 3

Institute of Physics, Charles University, Ke Karlovu 5, 121 16 Prague, Czech Republic  

> 4

CNR NANOTEC, Institute of Nanotechnology, Via Monteroni, 73100 Lecce, Italy 

*adriano.cola@cnr.it, lorenzo.dominici@nanotec.cnr.it 

Understanding charge carrier dynamics within electronic devices is crucial, as it governs both the 

internal evolution of signals and the externally measurable current. Yet, direct imaging of these 

dynamics remains elusive: existing approaches are often ind irect or inherently perturbative. Here, 

we introduce Carrier Dynamics by Pockels Imaging (CDPI), a sensitive, quantitative, and non -

invasive method that enables direct access to internal charge dynamics. By probing the local 

electric field, CDPI visualizes  photogenerated electron clouds in real space while simultaneously 

correlating their evolution with both conduction and displacement currents, thereby establishing 

a unified picture of carrier transport. The technique provides direct insight into fundament al 

mechanisms —including drift, diffusion, carrier –carrier interactions, trapping and  detrapping —as 

well as the spatiotemporal evolution of carrier cloud morphology. Demonstrated in CdTe 

radiation detectors with micrometre -scale spatial resolution and nanosecond temporal 

resolution, CDPI is broadly applicable to systems exhibiting appreciab le electro -optic responses. 

Beyond conventional semiconductors, the approach extends to organic, perovskite, and two -

dimensional optoelectronic materials, offering a new paradigm for directly linking internal carrier 

dynamics to device -level functionality. 

_______________________________________________________________________________________ 

Electronic and, to some extent, optoelectronic devices 

rely on charge transport, in which the flow of free 

charge carriers along electric field paths plays a key role 

in enabling and controlling their functionality. Typically, 

both external and built -in el ectric fields define these 

paths. At the same time, an excess of carriers 

dynamically affect s the instantaneous electric field 

distribution through their own charge, in a similar 

fashion to how heavy marbles deform a soft slipway. 

This  fundamental  concept  based on Maxwell's 

equations enables us, by developing a method to image 

the instantaneous electric field, to access the dynamics 

of charge clouds and to correlate the electric field to the 

currents flowing in the external circuit. The electric field 

induc ed modulation of optical properties, such as of the 

real part of the refractive index  n, is a convenient and 

widely used method to study local electric fields without 

perturbing them. As a matter of fact, a large class of 

materials, the crystals lacking inversion symmetry, 

exhibit a directionally dependent linear variation of  n in 

response to the application of an electric field, the 

Pockels effect. One asset of the Pockels effect is the 

intrinsically fast speed, limited only by the polarizability 

of the medium, as demonstrated by its wide use for 

optoelectronic applications. Hi gh -bandwidth optical 

modulators based on the Pockels effect have been 

demonstrated in various systems (semiconductors, 

organic films, graphene and other 2D materials), with a 

recent trend towards nano -photonics 1,2  and integrated 

photonics 3,4 . It has been  used for probing the field from 

outside, sampling fast electrical signals by placing 

external  EO  crystals over devices, such as integrated 

circuits 5, photoconductive switches 6,7  or photodiodes 8,9 .

The use of the Pockels effect  has become  common to 

(compiled on July 21 2026) Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 1/17 Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 1/17 probe the electric field’s distribution with good spatial 

resolution in the bulk  of radiation detectors , but only 

recently in more than one dimension 10,11  and so far, 

limited to stationary or slowly varying conditions 

despite its high speed’s potentialities. 

Besides the Pockels effect, other nonlinear optical 

effects based on third order susceptibility such as Kerr 12 

and Second Harmonic Generation 13 –17  (SHG) have been 

exploited to probe the electric field distribution with 

high spatial and temporal resolution , but limited to 

cases of high  electric fields . The dynamics of charge 

carriers can be also accessed by using approaches which 

are not directly based on the electric field, like transient 

absorption, ultrafast microscopy, photoluminescence. 

Numerous papers have been published 6,7,12 –28  [for a 

comprehensive review see  29 Wang], that differ 

significantly in the physical effect at the basis of 

detection, the system under investigation and the 

complexity of the experimental approach.  Despite 

reported  spatiotemporal resolutions can be extremely 

high, the approaches involve a strong perturbation, are 

limited  to the effect they are based  on  (mainly 

recombination, diffusion, excitation) and they  usually 

do not follow carrier clouds along electric field paths .

For a n extended summary of  studies on both  free carrier 

and/or  electric field imaging see t he  Table  S1.

In this work, we implement direct and sensitive imaging 

of the electric field and its dynamics, probing key carrier 

transport quantities  and mechanisms  involved in 

detecting optical radiation.  The novelty of our approach 

is represented by using the Pockels effect in a  pump -

probe electro -optical imaging configuration, which we 

call Carrier Dynamics by Pockels Imaging (CDPI) 

technique. This approach offers a different perspective 

to study free carrier dynamics, as it allows a direct 

visualization of the optically generated ele ctron cloud 

and of the associated  conduction and  displacement 

current,  this last being  distributed in the whole device. 

The corresponding flowing currents are evaluated, 

which allows us to achieve what we believe to be 

another striking objective of this work: to unveil the 

correspondence between the internal electric field 

reshaping and the  charges  supplied  by  the external 

circuit, i.e., the independently measured current. 

We validate our approach by applying CDPI on bulky 

CdTe radiation detectors, focusing on the electrons’ 

dynamics  with nanosecond and few  m resolutions, 

investigating the effect  of applied voltage and  impinging 

optical power. Upon increasing the amount of 

photogenerated charge we explore highly perturbative 

regimes, which in the past have been investigated 

almost exclusively from the perspective of externally 

flowing currents.  To corroborate our findings, n umerical 

simulations are carried out  by closely  mimicking  the 

experimental protocol  making use of  a well -established 

device model .

Carrier Dynamics by Pockels Imaging (CDPI) 

The initial outcome of the CDPI experiments is a series 

of  transmittance  Pockels images  T(x,y,t) , each one 

corresponding to a progressive delay of the probing 

pulse with respect to the excitation pulse (see  Fig. 1a  for 

the experimental scheme and Methods for details). 

The excitation pulse creates a  thin sheet  of electron -

hole pairs just below the irradiated semi -transparent 

contact, which moves under the applied electric field. In 

the present configuration, the irradiated contact is the 

cathode which implies that holes are quickly collected 

while electrons move  towards the bottom anode. 

Hence, the dynamics which we address here refer to 

electrons , but the  following analysis can also be applied 

to holes in case of anode irradiation. 

A preliminary visualization of the photogenerated 

electron  sheet  is appreciated in  Fig. 1b . The panel 

contains  differential transmittance images  T(x,y,t + dt)  -

T(x,y,t) at  specific  instants, where we can appreciate 

transmission  variations  in the order of few percent. The 

movement of the  electrons  is in fact revealed by  the 

intensity strip  (red color) moving downward to the 

collecting electrode  (Video S1 ). Given the planar 

geometry in the present case, we will focus on the 1D 

profiles  (along the y -direction) and their  dynamics , by 

averaging along the x -direction. 

Upon pump excitation , there is always a  propagating 

(usually  sigmoid -like ) wave in the electric field 

associated  with  the moving (usually Gaussian) carrier 

cloud  of concentration  𝛿𝑛 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ), as schematically shown 

in  Fig. 1c  (left panel). This propagating wave 

superimposes to the background electric field, the pre -

existent field profile E(t=0) under dark which is assumed 

as constant in the scheme. I n general,  such a field wave 

can be a small or large perturbation on a non -uniform 

spatial field profile.  CPDI technique offers a large 

operative dynamic range and in particular the capability 

to unveil minimal field perturbations  𝛥𝐸  of the order of 

few V cm -1.Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 2/17 Fig. 1  Experimental setup and working principles.  (a) Scheme of the working configuration. Two independent laser pulses are     

> temporally shifted by means of an electronic delay and sent on the device to work as a probe and a pump beam. The device is
> kept at a given voltage V and placed between two crossed lin ear polarizers (Pol1 and Pol2). The probe beam crossing the sample
> and polarizers is imaged on a CCD camera. ( b) Sequence of processed real -space images with the absolute transmittance
> variations at different time frames (t 1, t 2, … t j). ( c) Representative profiles of electric field and charge cloud (left subpanel) and
> conduction, displacement and total current (right subpanel). The cathode and anode are placed at y = 0 and y = 1000 μm,
> respectively. ( d) Experimental time -space chart of the electric field difference with respect to initial (just before the pump pulse)
> time. The applied voltage is 50 V and the time range is 280 ns.

In terms of currents, the conduction current is localized 

as a peak on  𝛿𝑛 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ), while the displacement current is 

characterized by a positive baseline and an opposite 

peak, again corresponding to the moving carrier cloud 

𝛿𝑛 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ). This behavior is depicted in  Fig. 1c  (right 

panel),  where  the two peaked contributions (red and 

blue solid lines)  represent the individual currents  and 

the flat  sum  is  the total current  J(t) (dashed black line). 

The chart in  Fig. 1d  shows how the CDPI technique can 

provide powerful insights. It illustrates the full time -

space dynamics of field variation  E( y, t)  – E(y, t = 0)  at a 

glance. Such a chart is at the basis for deriving the other 

involved quantities, including the displacement current 

𝜀  𝜕𝐸 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) 𝜕𝑡 ⁄ .

Hereafter we provide the main equations underlying 

CDPI. More details are reported in Methods.  The 

electron cloud  𝛿𝑛 (𝑡 , 𝑦 ) can be written in terms of the 

electric field spatial derivatives at the given and initial 

time, in this form: 

𝛿𝑛 (𝑡 , 𝑦 ) = 𝜀  

> 𝑞

[𝜕𝐸 (𝑦 ,𝑡 ) 

> 𝜕𝑦

− 𝜕𝐸 (𝑦 ,𝑡 =0) 

> 𝜕𝑦

] , (1) 

where the last term represents the initial space charge. 

Assuming diffusion is negligible, t he total current 

J(t) ,

sum of  conduction  and displacement terms , can be  thus 

expressed as: 

(2) 

where we note that 

J(t)  can be  written  only in terms of 

the electric field, with the  conduction and the 

displacement current s connected to the spatial and 

temporal derivative of the electric field, respectively. 

Hence  Eq.  (2)  highlights  the  framework of our approach: 

CDPI measures the electric field,  which encompasses 

the  charge  carriers inside the device and  relates them to 

those measured  in the external circuit. On the contrary, 

it is the externally accessed current that is normally used 

as a quantity to infer the internal transport mechanisms, 

upon auxiliary conditions.  Eq uation  (2) contains both 

temporal and spatial information and it provides a 

useful asset to extract the spatiotemporal distribution 

of the carrier cloud: it can be calculated either directly, Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 3/17 from the spatial derivative of the electric field  [Eq.  (1)] 

or, indirectly, from the complementary displacement 

current, i.e. from the temporal derivative of the electric 

field , according to: 

𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) = − 𝜀𝜕𝐸 (𝑦 ,𝑡 ) 𝜕𝑡  − 𝐽 (𝑡 )⁄ 

> 𝜇𝐸 (𝑦 ,𝑡 )

(3) 

An even more direct relationship current vs  electric  field 

emerges from the spatial integration of  Eq . (2), which 

results in the approximate expression  for the total 

curre nt 30,31 :

𝐽 𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑥 (𝑡 ) = (𝜀𝜇  2𝐿 ⁄ )[𝐸 2(𝐿 , 𝑡 ) − 𝐸 2(0, 𝑡 )] (4)

where the only dependence on the electric field is 

through  its  values  (not derivative s) at the electrodes ,

which is very convenient  for CDPI.  We highlight  a subtle 

yet fundamental outcome of the CDPI technique: the 

ability to accurately  reveal  the direct correspondence 

between the local carriers flowing inside the device and 

those induced in the external circuit, i.e. the total 

current  𝐽 (𝑡 ). On the contrary, it is the externally 

accessed current that is normally used as a quantity to 

infer the internal transport mechanisms, upon auxiliary 

conditions. 

Electron clouds at different voltages under low optical 

perturbation 

We first  analyse  the case of low optical perturbation, 

where the electric field is only slightly perturbed by 

optical excitation impinging on the cathode side of  the 

device, biased at different voltages . Due to the short 

penetration length  (Fig. S1 ), holes are quickly collected 

while the electron cloud drifts towards the anode. The 

clear motion of the electron cloud under different 

applied voltages can be directly imaged. This is achieved 

by applying the spatial and temporal derivative to the 

relevan t time -space charts of the electric field retrieved 

from EO experiments, like that of  Fig. 1d . The two 

associated quantities, the conduction and displacement 

currents, are reported in  Fig. 2a  and  Fig. 2b ,

respectively.  The ir well -matched  overlap  confirms  that 

they have been correctly resolved  and  offer a good 

representation  of the  charge carriers  drift ing  from the 

cathode (y = 0), where they are photogenerated, to the 

anode (y = 1000  μm).  It is possible to  observe a sharp 

localization of the electrons’ cloud, moving  with 

increasing speed at larger applied voltages , while at the 

smallest voltage there is  also  an appreciable spreading 

during the transit .

Looking in detail at the spatial features is possible, by 

reporting the electric field at one given instant (V = 200 

V, t = 30 ns), as shown in  Fig. 2c  (black solid line).  The 

profile  appears to be  in  very  good agreement with the 

stationary ones measured on similar devices in previous 

studies 32,33 . Altogether, we report the relative variation 

of the electric field (orange solid line) at that instant 

with respect to the initial time (i.e. before the carrier 

cloud was photogenerated). An approximate variation 

of less than 5% can be noticed between the  front and 

the back of the cloud. This is a low perturbation 

condition, and the electric field profile  during the 

dynamics  remains  in fact not very different from the one 

preceding  the optical pulse  (Video S2 ). The  associated 

displacement current  𝐽 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑦 ) profiles  are shown in  Fig. 

2d  at time intervals of 5 ns.  The moving peak at any time 

is smooth, symmetric and is well fitted by a Gaussian 

profile ( Video S3 ).  We point out that these profiles can 

be assumed to coincide almost exactly with the  carriers’ 

cloud. This association stems from Eq. (3)  due to the  thin 

cloud's extension and  has been  thoroughly verified.  As a 

result,  Fig s. 2e  and  2f  show the temporal evolution of 

the  center y 0 and width   of the electron clouds 

extracted from the fit at different  V. Consistently , the 

collection time decreases as the voltage increases. 

Furthermore, the slope of the y 0(t) trajectories in  Fig. 2e 

is not linear, as it would be in a uniform electric field. 

Instead, depending on the degree of non -uniformity of 

the field, it exhibits either accelerating (V = 50 V) or 

decelerating concavity (V > 100 V). The cloud slowdown 

near the anode, for example, i s due to the electric field 

drop in that region (see  Fig. 2c  at 200 V). 

Apart from speed, a  more  detailed analysis allows also 

to reveal that the cloud  dynamically  changes its size at 

any of the applied voltages, not only  at the lowest one .

In fact, w hile  at V = 50 V the  carrier  cloud  continues to 

expand  until  the collection time  hence getting  very 

large , as visible in the relative time -space chart,  at 

higher voltages  it just slightly expands and then shrinks 

back . Moreover, the time  of maximum expansion  is 

reached  earlier  at higher voltage  (Fig. 2f ). It should also 

be noted  that  this happens regardless  of  the fact that 

the  electron cloud starts out with an initial width  (t = 

0)  that  is larger for higher voltage. Th is latter  is just a 

featur ing  detail, that  can be considered a real effect due 

to the  interplay of  pump pulse width  with a larger 

speed , partially augmented by a blurry artefact due to 

the probe width (see Methods).  The cloud -size dynamics 

are worth their deepening, even here in a linear (i.e., not 

repulsive ) regime.  The Gaussian shape of the cloud is in 

agreement with basic models which include both 

thermal diffusion and Coulombic repulsion 34,35  to 

describe the charge dynamics in semiconductor 

detectors.  Such  models provide a Gaussian peak with a 

moving  centre  and an increasing width proportional to 

diffusion and repulsion, under a uniform electric field. In 

the  present  case of low -power experiments, repulsion 

should be ruled out, and the only mechanism for the Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 4/17 cloud size’s growing should be carrier diffusion, which 

predicts a size increase following a square root with 

time   = (2Dt) 1/2  (with D the diffusion coefficient). In any 

case, no dynamic reduction of the size is predicted. We 

have hence to observe that the observed non -

uniformity of the electric field is effective. In a

decreasing field, the front tends to decelerate before 

with respect to the tail. Hence, the apparent quasi -

parabolic evolution of  (t) comes from the competition 

between the diffusion and the decreasing electric field. 

Fig. 2  CDPI experiments at low power and different voltages.  (a) Time -space charts of the conduction current evaluated using 

the spatial derivative of the electric field. The charts refer to the applied voltages of 50 V, 100 V, 150 V, 200 V and 250 V  , going 

left to right, respectively. The inner top and bottom horizon tal solid lines represent the cathode (y = 0) and anode (y = 1000  m) 

position, respectively. The minimum on the colorbar  has been kept fixed at minus the maximum value for the clarity and 

symmetry of representation (white areas correspond to a zero current). ( b) Time -space charts of the displacement current 

evaluated from the temporal derivative of the electric field, for the same voltages of the previous charts. Here the maximum  of 

the colorbar  has been kept fixed at minus half of the minimum value (white still corresponds to zero current). The time ranges 

are 240, 120, 80, 60 and 48 ns, going left to right, respectively, in a,b. The time step is either 1 ns or 0.5 ns, and the ti  me and 

space sca lebars are the same through all the charts in panels a,b. ( c) Electric field spatial profile (black solid line) and its relative 

variation with respect to the initial time (orange solid line). The profiles are taken at fixed time into the dynamics  (t = 30 ns) . ( d)

Spatial profiles of the displacement current  𝐽 𝑑𝑖𝑠 (𝑦 ) at time steps of 5 ns during the transit. Both panels c,d refer to the 200 V 

applied voltage. ( e,f ) Peak position y 0 (e) and cloud width   (f) of the  𝐽 𝑑𝑖𝑠 (𝑦 ) clouds extracted from their Gaussian fit during time. 

The solid lines in f are a guide to the eye. Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 5/17 CDPI provides full access to basic transport properties 

without the need for spatial averaging and the 

approximations implicit in any other experimental 

evaluation. As a  harsh -sounding  example , the carrier 

mobility is  typically  evaluated  using  time of flight 

measurements  and the following relation:  𝜇 𝑎𝑣𝑒  =

𝐿 2 𝑡 𝑐 𝑉 ⁄ . The  collection time  tc is extracted  from the 

decaying currents  with a certain degree of arbitrariness ,

while a uniform electric field  V/L  is assumed.  CDPI 

provides trajectories and thus an accurate estimation of 

local velocity at the local electric field. However, from 

the non -approximated expression  𝜇  =

𝐿  ∫ 𝐸 (𝑦 0, 𝑡 )𝑑𝑡 

> 𝑡 𝑐
> 0

⁄ , we have extracted values  averaged 

over all different voltages  around 

 = (1076 ±73 ) cm 2 V-1

s-1, very similar to those calculated assuming a constant 

electric field , i.e. 

 = (1074 ±43 ) cm 2 V-1 s-1, these values 

being in good agreement with the literature 36 .

Electron clouds at large optical irradiation 

We study now the field and charge carriers’ dynamics 

observed under larger levels of optical irradiation. Here 

the pump beam power density  P varied along more than 

three orders of magnitude (P1-P8 going from 

approximately  1 μW cm -2 to 3900  μW cm -2), while the 

applied bias voltage is always V = 200 V. 

First, it is to be noted that  a prolonged exposition to 

optical irradiation  has been used  (around  20 min ) to 

achieve a steady state  (Fig.  S2) before starting the 

Pockels acquisitions. This was necessary because, under 

high optical irradiation, the electric field perturbation 

remains  much longer than the transit time, and even 

longer than the time interval associated with the 

repetition rate of 25 kHz. This effect is analogous to the 

flux -dependent polarization, critical in CdTe detectors 

under high X -Ray fluxes and it basically depend s on the 

modification of deep trap occupation 37 . The 

modification is visible in the E -field profiles at t = 0 

shown in  Fig. 3a , where the electric field undergoes a 

progressive bending. In particular, the field reduces 

under the irradiated cathode while increases close to 

the anode, upon increasing the incident optical power. 

Hence the meaning of these profiles is that they 

represent the initial electric field that will both guide 

and be perturbed by the moving electron cloud. 

A significant quantity to the extent of evaluating the 

induced dynamics and operational features is the 

collected charge,  which can be simply obtained from the 

electric field step associated to the localized drifting 

electron cloud, according to  𝛥𝐸  = 𝑞  

> 𝜀

𝑁 𝑆 , where  Ns is 

the areal charge density . The value  𝛥𝐸  (taken at t =  35

ns into the dynamics) is reported in  Fig. 3b  as a function 

of the incident optical power, highlighting a reasonable 

linear relation under low to moderate optical powers. 

However , it saturates to a value around 500 V cm -1 at 

the larger powers.  This value is substantially lower than 

the value of the electric field at the cathode, of the order 

of 2000 V cm -1 (see  Fig.  3a ), which means that even 

under high optical power the electric field under the 

irradiated electrode does not drop to zero at the time 

the electron cloud is photogenerated. The relation 

between carrier dynamics, electric field, trapping, 

contact properties an d how these all affect the currents, 

has been deeply investigated in the past 30,31,38 –40 ,

especially in the frame of strong carrier injection. For 

ohmic contacts, it is predicted the space charge limited 

(SCL) regime can be eventually achieved, i.e., the 

electric field is nulled at the electrode where strong 

photogeneration or high carrier in jection occurs. The 

limit case of full absence of electron injection, i.e., a 

blocking contact, results in a limited electric field 

reduction near the blocking contact where carriers are 

optically generated. This case  is referred 41  as space -

charge perturbed (SCP). We argue that the limited 

electric field reduction that we observe under optical 

pulsed excitation can be attributed to the upward 

energy band bending at the Pt/CdTe interface, which 

makes such contact slightly hole injecti ng 42  thus 

impeding full electron injection from the cathode and 

the  nulling  of  electric field nearby. On the side of the low 

optical power in  Fig. 3b , it is quite remarkable that we 

can appreciate electrical field changes down to  2 V cm -1

over a baseline of the order of few thousand V cm -1. This 

corresponds to detecting electron clouds with sheet 

density down to 7 x 10 6 cm -2. Such a concentration 

translates , for a typical cloud width of 40  μm, to the 

extremely low volumetric density of 3.5 x 10 9 cm -3 of 

photogenerated carriers, just above the intrinsic  carrier 

concentration. 

The time -space dynamics of the carrier  appears in the 

charts in  Fig. 3c,d,e  for three different values of optical 

power density (respectively,  P4 = 57  μW cm -2, P6 = 520 

μW cm -2 and  P8 = 3900  μW cm -2). These panels evidence 

both a distortion of the trajectory (linear in the low 

power case) and a strong enlargement of the cloud size, 

the last one been predicted in literature by numerical 

simulations 36,43 . The wider size of the cloud also  implies 

that the associated  Jdis  is not conformally mapped to the 

charge cloud, for such reason we recur here to the 

𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑦 ) visualization. It can be appreciated from the 

charts that the moving cloud starts out at a lower speed 

with increasing optical power , despite  it accelerates at 

later times. This trend is in a qualitative agreement with 

the electric  field  profile across the device ( Fig. 3a ). A 

better look at its position and shape is offered by the 

vertical crosscuts of the charts at fixed time (t =  35 ns  of 

the dynamics ), shown in  Fig. 3f . The peak has evidently Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 6/17 Fig. 3  CDPI experiments at increasing optical power.  (a) Electric field profiles at initial time for different optical pump power 

density (from  P1 = 1  μW cm -2 to  P8 = 3900  μW cm -2, over the 1 cm 2 area of the device). ( b) Estimated travelling charge (filled blue 

circles) for the eight values of increasing power. The charge is evaluated in terms of the electric field difference  ΔE at the two 

side of the clouds (at intermediate time). The collected charge is retrieved instead by time integrating the approximated cur rent 

(empty red squares). ( c,d,e ) Time -space charts of the carriers’ cloud  𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙  (𝑦 ) at three optical powers ( P4, P6 and  P8,

respectively). They are retrieved by applying Eq. (6) to the electric field charts. The time range is 72 ns, and the time ste p is 1 ns. 

The inner top and bottom horizontal solid lines represent the cathode and anode position, respectively. ( f) Spatial profiles of 

𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑦 ) for the same optical powers (yellow, blue and red for  P4, P6 and  P8, respectively) taken at t = 3 5 ns, corresponding to 

the vertical dashed line in the panels c,d,e. The bi -Gaussian fits are superimposed (solid black lines). ( g) Peak position y 0 extracted 

from the bi -Gaussian fits during time (the data is empty dots; solid lines are a guide for the eye). ( h) The extracted front and tail 

widths (solid and dashed lines, respectively) as a function of time. 

slowed down, and its spatial distribution enlarges with 

increasing optical power  (Video S4 ). Furthermore, at 

low optical power (up to  P4) the spatial distribution is 

symmetric and, as we have already seen, well described 

by a Gaussian function (superimposed fit, solid black 

line). On the contrary, under high optical powers ( P6 and 

P8) a bi -Gaussian function is needed to follow the data, 

bearing different widths for the front ( f) and for the 

back ( b) of the cloud.  The  bi -Gaussian fits carried out 

during the drift of the electron cloud allow us to 

visualize the trajectory change by looking at the position 

of the peak y 0 in time, as reported in  Fig. 3g . The Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 7/17 trajectory starts to change at powers larger than  P4, with 

an appreciable slowing d own during the initial instants .

It should be warned  though  that the large extension and 

deformation of the electron cloud limit the meaning of 

trajectory. Concerning the spatial shape of the cloud, we 

report in  Fig. 3h  the evolutions of  f and  b in time (solid 

and dashed line, respectively). A systematic trend can 

be identified. At low optical power the two widths are 

basically overlapping each other during motion, 

meaning of a Gaussian shape and negligible asymmetry. 

Their value grows just sligh tly before decreasing (as also 

seen in  Fig. 2f ). At larger powers the cloud gets wider 

and growing till longer times, with a maximum frontal 

width reaching 80  μm (at 20 ns) and 160  μm (at 32 ns), 

for  P6 and  P8, respectively. More strikingly, the tail width 

gets even larger and at increasingly later time, up to 240 

μm (at 33 ns) and 400  μm (at 38 ns), for  P6 and  P8,

respectively. In summary, it is evident that increasing 

the optical excitation power causes the cloud of 

electrons to spread out over large part of the sample in 

agreement with previous simulations 36,43 , becoming 

increasingly asymmetric with a tail that is larger than the 

front. 

When increasing the incident optical power, Coulombic 

repulsion plays a dominant role. Compared to thermal 

diffusion, Coulombic repulsion predicts again a Gaussian 

distribution in 3D configurations but with a width 

proportional to (Nt) 1/3 , where N is the total number of 

photogenerated carriers per pulse. Calculations 34,35  are 

for a spherical/ellipsoidal carrier cloud shape, while in 

our case the carrier cloud is a 2D sheet moving in one 

direction. This is still expected to expand with a (Nt) 1/3 

dependence in such a direction, but  with  a higher 

multiplicative factor to account for enhanced repulsion 

due to parallel lines of force. The cloud broadening 

effect of repulsion is clear from  Fig. 3h , where both  f

and  b exhibit a net increase with time and the incident 

optical power. In any case, diffusion and repulsion alone 

cannot account for the large asymmetry of the cloud: 

trapping is another mechanism that can directly affect 

both the carrier concentration and the  shape of their 

cloud. The tail observed in the electron cloud is 

indicative that trapping becomes effective under high 

optical power. Generally, at operative E -fields (> 600 V 

cm -1) electron trapping is considered negligible because 

the associated lifetime is of the order of 1  μs , which is 

much longer than the transit time. Yet, under large 

optical irradiations, nonlinear trapping -related effects 

have been reported in CdTe and related 

compounds 36,44,45 . Further confirmation is provided in 

Fig. 3b: as the optical power increases, the charge  Ns

evaluated during drift (blue points) becomes smaller 

than that obtained from integrating the total current 

transient over long times (Eq. (4), red open squares). 

This discrepancy arises because the former neglects 

trapped electrons, while the latter accounts for them 

through detrapping processes, as discussed in the 

following paragraph.  As an interesting feature, there is 

also a secondary peak in  Fig. 3e  (curve  P8) very close to 

the cathode. Such a peak lasts there for times longer 

than collection time and can be ascribed to  a 𝑛 𝑡 (𝑦 , 𝑡 )

fixed charge due to traps localized  near the optically 

irradiated cathode. In this regard, it is known that the 

fabrication process of detectors introduces a defective 

region, about 2 μm thick, under the contact called the 

'dead layer', which prevents charge collection 46 . We will 

see how both a distributed and localized defect will 

modify the observed charge profiles in the case of 

numerical simulations. As a matter of fact, the 

opportunity to independently access both free and fixed 

charges contributions is another uniqu e feature offered 

by CDPI.  Regarding the carrier cloud, t o our knowledge, 

the spatiotemporal evolution and its  asymmetry ha ve 

not been so clearly identified so far in a device under 

operative conditions. 

Current transients 

Albeit  approximate , Eq. ( 4) provides a  straightforward 

and  compact  expression for the current transient, 

avoiding the use of noisy electric field derivative  of Eq. 

(2) , but only relying on their values at the electrodes. 

Figure 4  shows a comparison of the current  transients 

for  different optical powers. These are  either  calculated 

from the CDPI experiments by using Eq. ( 4) ( Fig. 4a ) or 

taken from independent CT (current transient) 

experiments (Fig. 4b ) measured by means of an 

oscilloscope, see also Methods. While the transient 

edges generally align  well  (at around 50 ns, 

corresponding to the transit time at 200 V), the peak 

occurs  slightly  earlier  in the CT experiments conducted 

at the highest optical powers. The SCP 30  and SCL 38 

models predict a peak occurring at approximately 0.8 of 

transit time, which is consistent with the observations 

made in the CT experiments. The  slope of the transient 

(the part before the edge at 50 ns) changes in both  kinds 

of  experiments from negative to positive when 

increasing the optical power.  Th ese time slopes are  a

footprint of either decelerating or accelerating carrier 

clouds,  consistent with the  shape of the spatial profiles 

in the  background  electric field as seen in  Fig. 3a . After 

the edge, a  decay  happens  in both  experiments , that is 

longer  with increasing optical power.  The development 

of such a  temporal  tail  in the current  is concomitant with 

the  electron clouds becoming asymmetric  in space  and 

thus  ascribed  to  detrapping  as well . We should  in fact 

remember that trapping/detrapping events can delay 

the arrival of the carriers at the collecting electrode far 

beyond the regular transit time. Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 8/17 At the start of the transients and for few ns, CT 

experiments show a fast initial peak (even though 

affected by some  instrumental  signal ringing ). Such a 

component is missing in the CDPI transients and is 

induced , as will be confirmed by numerical simulations, 

by  the photogenerated holes.  Since  holes are 

photogenerated near the cathode and rapidly collected, 

they provide a fast initial current contribution  but also 

affect the electric field at the cathode with a sign 

opposite to that of electrons.  The  apparent  initial 

current deficit  observed in  the CDPI transients  is hence 

due to  applying  the single -carrier approximated Eq.  (4)

on top of the EO  analyses .          

> Fig. 4 Current dynamics. (a) Experimental current versus time
> at different powers calculated from the CDPI experiments
> using Eq. (4). (b)Independent current transients (CT)
> measurements by means of an external oscilloscope. The
> insets in the two panels show the currents on a semi -log scale.

In summary, within its limits, the approximate current 

of Eq. ( 4) enables us to validate the CDPI's key findings, 

which correlate the dynamics of the electric field  —

typically inaccessible to experiments  — with the primary 

observable quantity of electronic devices: the external 

current. Remarkably, an all -optical expe riment enables 

us to infer the dynamics of the internal electric field and 

the associated currents flowing outside the device 

directly. Thus, CDPI exploits the Pockels effect to map 

electrical and optical signals onto a common 

information space, extending  conventional 

optoelectronic functionalities beyond standard 

conversion schemes. 

Numerical simulations 

To improve our understanding of experimental 

phenomenology, we performed numerical simulations 

that captured most of its features and results. The time -

dependent drift -diffusion equations were solved by 

starting from an established  model 11,33  for the bulk of 

the CdTe and the contacts , here updated for transient 

conditions (see Methods and  Table  S2 for details) .

In order to mimic the  experiments (see protocol in  Fig. 

S2), preliminary and prolonged (15 -20 min) optical 

expositions to prepare the system are simulated, 

assuming an effective, time averaged intensity for the 

optical pump.  After such conditioning, a balance 

between the long trapping and de -trapping times of the 

deep level  occurs which  can modify the  internal space 

charge distribution, and thus the  electric field profile 

with  respect to  dark . Like in  Fig. 3a  for the experiments ,

simulation s in  Fig . 5a  show that the profiles are not 

affected in case of low irradiation while, for high pulse 

levels, the electric field is  increasingly  damped on the 

cathode side.  Also in simulations, such  profiles 

represent the initial electric field  before the dynamics .

The simulations confirm that, under low optical 

irradiation, the electron cloud retains a well -defined 

Gaussian spatial distribution at any instant and for the 

entire drift of the cloud, when different applied voltages 

are applied. We have performed simula tions 

corresponding to the experiments of  Fig. 2 and 

subsequently applied Gaussian fits on the retrieved 

𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑥 , 𝑡 ) clouds during motion. The widths  (t) as a 

function of time are reported in  Fig. 5b  for different 

voltages,  showing a good agreement  with the 

corresponding CDPI results of  Fig. 2f . While at the 

lowest voltage the cloud size increases along all the 

transit, for larger voltages V (> 50 V) it shows a 

maximum   in the order of 50 -60  μm before getting 

reduced. The maximum width is reached  earlier  for 

larger cloud speeds, i.e., for higher applied voltages. This 

confirms the interplay between electron diffusion and a 

decreasing electric field,  where the latter  tends  to 

squeeze the electron cloud.  It is important to note that 

also in the case of numerical simulations, the optical 

pump width (1 ns) working together with the cloud 

speed plays a role in the charge cloud broadening. This 

is evident from the voltage -dependent size of the cloud 

at  the beginning of the dynamics  shown in  Fig. 5b , which 

can also be seen in the CDPI result ( Fig. 2f ). Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 9/17 Fig. 5  Numerical simulations.  (a) Initial field profiles prepared at different optical pump powers.  The two labelled profiles 

correspond to the  P4 and  P8 power densities of the experiments.  (b) Evolution of the cloud size extracted from the Gaussian fit of 

the simulations at different bias voltages and low power optical irradiation. ( c,d ) Complete time -space charts of the carrier cloud 

𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) in a low -power case (c) and high -power case (d), under an applied voltage of 200 V. ( e,f ) Time -space charts of the 

carrier cloud using the same high optical pump power of panel d but adding a trapping level. The two cases refer to a shallow 

level homogeneous in the bulk depth (e) and a surface defect level localized in the first few  μm from the cathode (f). The insets 

in panels c -f show the  normalized profiles at fixed time (t = 35 ns into the dynamics, dashed vertical line in the charts), highlighting 

the correspondence in shape of the charge  [𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑦 ), solid blue lines ] and the displacement current itself [ 𝐽 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙  (𝑦 ), dashed 

black lines].  The spatial and time ranges of the dynamics are 1000  μm and 72 ns, respectively, in all the four charts. ( g) Total 

current transients  𝐽 𝑡𝑜𝑡 (𝑡 ) for simulations of panels c,d,f,g. ( h) Comparison of  𝐽 𝑡𝑜𝑡 (𝑡 ) (solid blue line) and  𝐽 𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑥 (𝑡 ) (dashed black 

line) in the same high -power case as panel d. The panel also shows their difference (dash -dot red line) , evidencing the initial hole 

contribution .

In  Fig. 5c  and  Fig. 5d  we report the time -space charts of 

the charge cloud corresponding to low and high optical 

irradiation cases, respectively. The charts should be 

compared with the CDPI results of  Fig. 3c  (low) and  Fig. 

3e  (high power).  Similarly to CDPI experiments, t he two 

different power regimes feature an opposite trajectory Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 10/17 bending, decelerating in the low optical irradiation case 

and accelerating in the high -power case. In the latter it 

is also evident a strong cloud broadening. While the 

change of motion agrees with the field profiles inversion 

shown in  Fig. 5a , the widening can be ascribed to 

Coulomb repulsions, intrinsically considered by the 

model.  Cross -cut profiles of the  𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑥 , 𝑡 ) timecharts 

in  Fig. 5c  and  Fig. 5d  are  reported in their inset, allow ing 

to evaluate the electron cloud shape at a fixed time.  At

low optical power ( Fig. 5c ) the simulations confirm the 

symmetric Gaussian shape  seen  in the experiments. For 

high optical power ( Fig. 5d ), they feature asymmetric 

reshaping. Strikingly, such  induced  asymmetry  is 

opposite  than in the  experiments ( see profiles for  P6 and 

P8 in  Fig. 3f ), with the front of the cloud being  now 

slightly  longer than the back one.  The experimental 

asymmetry  is  hence  a notable feature that cannot be 

captured by the basic modelling implemented so far ,

which excluded appreciable trapping. Therefore, we 

must  recall  that  the  CDPI  results  indicate  that trapping 

and  detrapping phenomena  take place . To tackle this 

issue, we have introduced an additional electron 

trapping level in cases of high optical irradiation. These 

improved simulations consider  either  a spatially uniform 

or  a localized trap distribution near the electrode, 

respectively shown in  Figs. 5 e,f , both under the same 

high level of optical irradiation as the simulations of  Fig. 

5d . In th ese cases, a further cloud broadening is clear, 

mainly in the rear of the cloud,  now in agreement with 

CDPI  experimental profiles . The longer tail can be 

resolved  in the profiles shown in the inset s and  has  an 

approximated bi -Gaussian  shape  in the case of uniform 

trap distribution ( Fig.  5e). A n even longer tail in space  is 

seen for  the localized trap  case  (Fig.  5f), that is now 

featuring  an almost flat  plateau on the rear of the cloud .

These simulations confirm, under high optical 

irradiation, the role of a shallow level in the electron 

trapping and detrapping  by adding a tail in the moving 

carriers’ cloud. Naturally, it is also expected that such a 

spatial  tail results in a delayed flux of electrons with 

respect to the unmodified transit time of untrapped 

electrons. In essence, the spatial tail  also  implies a 

temporal tail in the total current transient. Indeed, this 

is what we can see in  Fig. 5 g, where we report the total 

current as a function of time for the simulations of  Fig s.

5c,d, e,f. In  the  absence of trapping (case c,d), the  whole 

current transient is relatively sharp in time (<70 ns).  On 

the contrary, a  temporal  tail appears in the  current for 

the case of a  shallow level  uniform  in the bulk (case  e).

The dynamics  become even longer for the localized trap 

(case  f),  with the main peak followed by a successive 

bounce  for the overall duration of  up to 350 ns. 

The  appropriate explanation of the  observed 

phenomenology  could  involve  a combination of the two 

discussed modeling , to be further refined. Yet this 

represents a good demonstration of the powerful 

access and insight granted by the CDPI technique. For 

example, in CdTe detectors under intense optical 

irradiations, different trapping effects on the electron 

clouds have be en simulated 36  and inferred starting from 

externally assessed experimental current transients, 

which integrate  the spatial contributions  into a single 

quantity. 

We want to point out that numerical model ling allows 

us to validate a fundamental statement in  the CDPI 

technique  presented before. The fact that the electron 

cloud  𝛿𝑛 (𝑥 , 𝑡 ) can be evaluated starting from the 

displacement current, by means of the equivalent 

𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑥 , 𝑡 ) as retrieved in Eq. ( 3), has been thoroughly 

assessed  and verified in  all  the different conditions 

discussed here.  Furthermore, w e also show in  the inset 

of  Fig s. 5c ,d,e, f the  difference in  the  moving charge 

[𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑥 ), solid lines] and displacement current  itself 

(𝐽 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑥 ), dashed lines). While  only  a slight  deviation  is 

noted  for  high -power cases , the perfect  overlap  in the 

low power case  confirms  that the displacement current 

can be used  directly  in  localized -cloud  conditions , as a 

good match to the charge cloud shape and dynamics. 

Finally,  we analyze  the role of the photogenerated 

holes , whose presence was inferred from CT 

experiments in  Fig.  4b . In terms of conduction currents 

and their spatial distribution , simulations highlight that 

holes  become  relevant, and even  dominant  when  very 

close to the cathode ( Fig.  S3).  Looking at the  current 

transients,  such holes  result in an additional 

contribution at the  very  beginning  of the dynamics.  They 

can  eventually  manifest in  a peak,  which can be  barely 

perceived in  Fig.  5g . The ir presence  is more appreciable 

when  zooming  the time range and  compar ing the 

retrieved  Jtot (t) and  Japrox (t) transients in  Fig.  5h (solid 

blue and dashed black, respectively , for case of panel d ).

In fact,  the  Japrox (t) expression has be en  obtained  from 

simulations  by assuming no photogenerated holes.  The 

difference  between  Jtot (t) and  Japrox (t)  (dash -dot red 

curve) is  showing an appreciable initial peak  that is 

precisely  due to the hole s’  contribution. The difference 

also points out an extended  but very weak  later  bump. 

This  is due to other approximations involved when 

deriving Eq.  (4). 

A last consideration  is worth  about  the simultaneous 

presence and movement of electrons and holes  in CDPI ,

that  can be  resolved  when  are  in  spatially separated 

regions and  can be identified  from  the  opposite  drifting .

On the other hand, when the two  kinds  of carriers are 

spatially close (as at the very beginning of the 

photogeneration , or when crossing if separately 

injected by the two electrodes ), their  contributions Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 11/17 subtract each other according to Gauss’s  law ,

momentarily reducing their neat visualization  by  the 

CDPI  technique .

Conclusions 

We have implemented Carrier Dynamics by Pockels 

Imaging, an immediate, sensitive and fast pump -probe 

imaging of the electric field for optoelectronic devices 

exhibiting Pockels effect. CDPI, here applied to CdTe 

radiation detectors, is based on the fundamental 

principle that any carrier excess dynamically affects the 

internal electric field. As such, the method enables a 

direct and quantitative visualization of an optically 

generated electron cloud and of the ass ociated 

conduction and  displacement currents in the whole 

volume of operative devices.  Since  Pockels effect is 

related to the medium polarizability, the modulation is 

extremely fast and thus CDPI takes in principle an 

instantaneous picture of the carrier cloud. Moreover, 

since the effect is probed by a not -absorbed optical 

beam, CDPI is not invasi ve. 

Besides the applicative interest, fundamental carrier 

transport properties, like drift, diffusion , repulsion ,

trapping /detrapping , and  electrode injection  can be 

thus directly accessed without limitations such as 

auxiliary  hypothesis, approximations or spatial 

averages.  Pre sent results refer to electrons , but  CDPI is 

also suitable to investigate hole clouds,  this depending 

on which of the two electrodes is irradiated . We have 

found that under different applied voltages and low 

optical intensity, the Gaussian shape of the electron 

cloud is well maintained  during drift, with  a width  first 

increasing due to diffusion and then  shrinking  due to 

decreasing electric field  profiles.  On the front of 

sensitivity, we have detected electric fields differences 

of about 2 V cm -1 associated to the drift of  low -

concentration  electron clouds , just above the intrinsic 

level. 

Conversely, high optical excitation intensities allow us to 

investigate perturbed space charge regimes, which until 

now have only been  inferred  by measuring  externally 

flowing currents. Notably, in addition to  significant 

expansion of the electron cloud due to  Coulomb 

repulsion, we have observed pronounced tails in the 

moving clouds due to detrapping processes, as 

confirmed by independent current measurements. We 

have  deduced  that trapping in CdTe detectors  is 

enhanced by optical intensity and  mostly  associated 

with a defective layer  possibly  close to the surface. This 

leads us to another crucial point that we have 

independently verified: our all -optical approach 

correlates the dynamics of internal charges with the 

current flowing in an external circuit. This correlation 

between internal and external charges, achieved by 

modulating the refractive index, has implications that 

extend well beyond the specific case reported here. In 

our opinion, it  represents  a breakthrough in 

optoelectronics, enabling novel functionalities that have 

an impact on various areas of fundamental physics, 

photonics, electronics and materials science. 

A standard drift -diffusion simulator, equippe d with a 

well -established model,  can capture all the observed 

CDPI features. Besides validating our approach, this 

substantially improves control of present CdTe devices 

from a microscopic point of view to the level of device 

performance. Furthermore, given that CDPI can easily 

be extende d to two dimensions, it paves the way for 

novel or improved designs in devices where charge 

collection is critical, such as detector matrices. 

Finally, CDPI shows potentialities along several 

directions . 1) Materials.  Beyond non -centrosymmetric 

semiconductors , it applies to perovskites, graphene, 

organic materials, standard electro -optic platforms such 

as LNO, LTO, and BTO, and, more generally, to any 

material exhibiting a Pockels response or other 

appreciable electro -optic effect (e.g., Kerr ,

photorefractive, plasma dispersion ).  2) Time resolution. 

This can be further advanced, being  here mainly  limited 

by pump –probe laser parameters such as pulse energy, 

pulse  duration, and timing jitter.  3) Spatial 

dimensionality and resolution.  CDPI can be adapted to 

probe microscopic devices, operated in reflection as 

well as transmission, and extended from the current 

implementation to fully two -dimensional  distributions .

4) Devices.  The technique is broadly suited to 

investigating any device in which  is involved  the 

propagation of either  electrically or optically generated 

excess carriers. 

METHODS 

Experimental setup.  The radiation detectors (Acrorad 

Co., Ltd., Okinawa, Japan)  used in the experiments are 

based on CdTe:Cl semi -insulating crystals (resistivity   =

6-7 x 10 9 Ohm cm) 33 , slightly p -type of size 10x10x1mm 3.

The nominal drift electrons and holes mobilities are  e=

1050 cm 2V-1s-1 and  h= 80 cm 2V-1s-1, respectively. The Pt 

contacts, partially transparent, cover the whole upper 

and lower square surfaces, parallel to the (111) crystal 

planes. Bias  voltage  is applied by a B2987B  Keysight 

Electrometer. Four nominally equal detectors were 

used in this work, and the results were highly 

comparable. The sample is placed on a thermal stage 

whose position is carefully controlled along six degrees Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 12/17 of freedom by multiple translational and angular stages. 

Measurements have been carried out in air at room 

temperature. 

Two optical beams are impinging on the sample, in a 

pump and probe configuration, coming from two 

independent pulsed lasers both of measured width 

around 1.0 ns. The pump beam impinges vertically on 

the top semi -transparent contact, while the probe beam 

is  perpendicular to the pump and it impinges on the 

lateral side of the sample. The probe beam is electrically 

triggered by the pump one through a pulsed delay 

generator  (Highland Technology T564) . The jitter 

between the two optical pulses is less than 100  ps, thus 

resulting in an overall temporal resolution mainly 

limited by  the probe pulse  width  (1 ns) .

The pump beam is produced by a supercontinuum white 

laser (Leukos, Samba), repetition rate 25 kHz, which is 

spectrally selected by a band -pass filter (780 nm  - 830 

nm) to be immediately above the  energy  bandgap (E g =

1.43 eV, corresponding to λ g = 840 nm) for a penetration 

length short (≈1  m) with respect to the sample 

thickness of 1 mm  (Fig.  S1). The resulting optical power 

density is varied by mean of neutral filters in the 1  - 3900 

μW cm -2 range.  The wavelength of the laser probe beam 

(customized  by  Eikonal Optics) is 980 nm , well  below  the 

energy  bandgap and is thus not absorbed by the sample. 

Its power is also small enough (tens of  μW) not to induce 

additional electro -optic effects. This allows  us  to probe 

the internal electric field by means of the Pockels effect 

in a transmission configuration. The probe pulse is 

linearly polarized at 45 ° with respect to the vertical y -

direction and experiences the electric field induced 

birefringence when crossing the sample. The effect is 

detected due to a second polarizer (analyzer) oriented 

at −45 °, placed behind the device (cross -polarizers 

configuration). A half -wave plate is placed before the 

first polarizer to maximize the optical intensity at 

disposal. The images P(x,y) of the transmitted intensity 

are recorded by  a cooled high -sensitivity monochrome 

camera (Q Imaging, EXi  Blue) equipped with a 1× –6× 

zoom lens (Edmund Optics, VZM ™ 600i Zoom Imaging 

Lens). The system is suitable to image the 1 mm 

detector thickness onto a 1392 × 1040 -pixel area. The 

camera pixel size is 6.45 μm, and the integration time 

ranges from 3  s to 5 s. The spatial resolution of the setup 

in the used experimental configuration is limited by 

different factors: the numerical aperture  NA  of the 

optical zoom lens at the employed magnification ( 5x 

magnification, object -space NA ≈ 0.05, corresponding to 

a diffraction -limited resolution of ≈ 6.7 μm), the 

horizontal optical probe alignment relative to the 

detector, the vertical electric field uniformity inside the 

detector, and most significantly, the  1 cm total device 

length  in transmission mode. This  length  degrades 

resolution through beam divergence, refraction, and 

scattering, effectively increasing the minimum 

resolvable feature size . Combining these contributions 

in quadrature,  the overall spatial resolution is 

conservatively estimated to be in the  range of 10 –

15 μm, which  remains lower than the minimum 

measured widths of the electron clouds (σ ≈ 20 μm, 

FWHM ≈ 45 μm).  The sample has been conditioned 

each time before a given experimental sequence by 

keeping it under the selected applied voltage and pump 

beam power for  15 –20  minutes. This allowed it to reach 

a quasi -stationary condition before starting the CDPI 

acquisition  (Fig.  S2).

In the sequence, a set of images is registered upon 

changing the delay between pump and probe by fixed 

time intervals. Usually, the time step is either 0.5 ns or 

1.0 ns in the short -time range case (up to a total 200 ns) 

or  either  10  ns or 20  ns in the long -time range (up to  2

μs). Before and after the CDPI acquisitions with the 

pulsed probe, a continuous LED filtered at 980  nm and 

impinging on the sample using a beam -splitter, was 

instead used as check and reference probe beam.  For 

the whole protocol procedure see  Fig.  S2. The 

experimental setup and the sequence of different 

instruments operations have been coordinated by 

means of a custom program in the NI Labview graphical 

language. The external current transients have been 

taken under similar conditions adopted for the  Pockels 

experiments, with corresponding applied voltages and 

pump beam power. The sample has been connected to 

an amplifier (Mini -Circuit, bandwidth 1 GHz) and the 

output signal fed to a 1 GHz oscilloscope ( Lecroy), 

triggered by the pump laser output. The detector 

voltage bias is applied on the same electrode, isolated 

from the amplifier input by a capacitor. 

Electro -optic imaging.  The intensity transmitted 

throughout cross -polarizers is zero, in the case of the 

probe passing unaffected through the unbiased sample. 

This changes in the presence of internal birefringence 

(intrinsic or induced by an applied electric field), 

according t o a modulation formula 47 , and the scheme 

can convert any phase difference (here between the x 

and y linear polarizations) into an intensity signal.  With 

the present orientation of the  polarizers and of  sample 

crystal planes, the intensity is sensitive only to the y 

component of the externally applied electric field.  Such 

Ey is effectively the only present field component due to 

full -surface planar electrodes  geometry  and wide 

pumping beam,  inducing  a vertical gradient  of the 

electric potential inside the device.  The  raw  P(x,y ,t )

images  depend on  the  Ey(x, y,t ) electric field distribution ,

and they  can be  normalized  with respect to  Ppara (x,y)  as :

𝑇 (𝑥 , 𝑦 , 𝑡 ) = 𝑃 (𝑥 ,𝑦 ,𝑡 ) 

> 𝑃 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎 (𝑥 ,𝑦 )

= 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 [𝜋 

> 2
> 𝐸 𝑦 (𝑥 ,𝑦 ,𝑡 )
> 𝐸 𝑜

] (M1) Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 13/17 Here  Ppara (x,y)  is the image at the maximum transmitted 

intensity of the probe, taken in the parallel -polarizers 

configuration (both aligned at 45° and in the absence of 

any induced birefringence, i.e., with no applied voltage). 

The use  of normalization in  Eq. (M 1) is crucial in the 

analysis because  beside enabling quantitative 

evaluation,  it can  partially  account for  reflection loss ,

not homogeneous  distribution of impinging  intensity 

and other device defects imaging. The constant  Eo is 

given by: 

𝐸 𝑜  = 𝜆  

> √3𝑛 0
> 3𝑟 41 𝐿

(M2) 

where  no is the field free refractive index in CdTe,  r41  its 

linear electro -optic coefficient,  L = 10 mm is the physical 

path length through the crystal, i.e., the detector z -

depth, and λ the wavelength of the incident probe light. 

Considering  n0 = 2.8 and  r41  = 5.5 × 10 -12  mV −1 48  results 

in  Eo = 4.68  kV cm -1. The meaning of  Eo is that it 

represents the local electric field value that allows a 

complete polarization inversion of the crossing probe 

beam, hence the Pockels image bears maxima (equal to 

Ppara ) and minima (zero) intensity values at the 

transverse xy positions where the internal electric field 

is equal to odd and even multiples of  Eo , respectively. 

When in the presence of local electric field values 

greater than  Eo, multiple fringes appear in the Pockels 

T(x,y)  images and an unwrapping -phase reconstruction 

is needed to achieve the  E(x,y)  profile. In the present 

work electric fields do not exceed  Eo, and a simple 

inversion of the square sinusoidal dependence in Eq. 

(M1 ) allows to obtain the  Ey(x,y)  image from the 

normalized  EO  images. From the  Ey(x,y)  images, average 

Ey(y)  profiles are obtained  and smoothed .

Carrier transport in CDPI experiments.  The  Gauss’s law ,

at any given time, relates the electric field to the mobile 

and fixed charge inside the device 30,31 : 

> 𝜕𝐸 (𝑦 ,𝑡 )
> 𝜕𝑦

= 𝑞  

> 𝜀

(𝑛 𝑡 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) + 𝛿𝑛 (𝑦 , 𝑡 )) . (M3 )

Here  𝛿𝑛 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) represents the free electron cloud density 

and  𝑛 𝑡 (𝑡 , 𝑦 ) the fixed space charge density.  In general, 

electron trapping time in CdTe is about 1  s, which is 

greater than the transit time under operative electric 

fields (>600 V  cm -1 in Pt/CdTe/Pt detectors) and thus not 

effective. Under  these  conditions,  𝑛 𝑡 (𝑡 , 𝑦 ) remains 

stationary during the cloud drifting and equals the 

values prior photogeneration at t = 0,  𝑛 𝑡 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) ≈

𝑛 𝑡 (𝑦 , 𝑡  = 0). This means that there is a stationary 

electric field distribution on which a perturbation is 

transiently superimposed due to the flowing charge. 

Depending on the ratio between the free and fixed 

charges, the perturbation can be small or very 

important, up  to becoming comparable or greater than 

the background.  Under high optical excitation levels, 

electron trapping is enhanced by specific shallow levels 

thus directly affecting both charge terms in Eq. (1) ,

namely the  mobile  carrier density  𝛿𝑛 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ), and  the 

fixed  charge density  𝑛 𝑡 (𝑡 , 𝑦 ).

In the ideal case of uniform electric field and negligible 

trapping,  because  of  Gauss’s law , the electric field is 

reduced in the regions behind its position and enhanced 

in front of it by a total difference of 

𝛥𝐸  = 𝑞  

> 𝜀

𝑁 𝑆  , (M4 )

where 

𝑁 𝑆  = ∫ 𝛿𝑛 (𝑦 , 𝑡 )𝑑𝑦  (M5 )

is the  areal charge density .

By assuming a constant carrier mobility  𝜇  and that the 

diffusion component is negligible, the conduction 

current can be written as  only due to the drift term 

𝐽 𝑐 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) = 𝑞𝜇𝐸 (𝑦 , 𝑡 )𝛿𝑛 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) (M6 )

at any given point (and time) inside the device.  The 

diffusion term can be ignored  in the present range of 

electric fields and we further verified this by means of 

numerical simulations. 

The  total current  𝐽 (𝑡 ) is due to the sum of two terms, 

the conduction current  𝐽 𝑐 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) and the displacement 

current  𝐽 𝑑 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ), and is given by: 

𝐽 (𝑡 ) = 𝑞𝜇𝐸 (𝑦 , 𝑡 )𝛿𝑛 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) + 𝜀  𝜕𝐸 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) 𝜕𝑡 ⁄ .

(M7 )

By  assuming a negligible trapping on the scale of transit 

time,  𝑛 𝑡 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) = 𝜕𝐸 (𝑦 ,𝑡 =0) 

> 𝜕𝑦

and by inserting  Eq. (M3 ) into 

Eq.  (M7 ), we can express the total current  only in terms 

of the electric field: 

𝐽 (𝑡 ) = 𝜇𝜀𝐸 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) [𝜕𝐸 (𝑦 ,𝑡 ) 

> 𝜕𝑦

− 𝜕𝐸 (𝑦 ,𝑡 =0) 

> 𝜕𝑦

] + 𝜀  𝜕𝐸 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) 𝜕𝑡 ⁄

. (M8 )

Operatively, the spatiotemporal distribution of the 

carrier cloud can be calculated either directly, from the 

spatial derivative of the electric field (Eq.  M3) or, 

indirectly, from the complementary displacement 

current  (Eq. M8) , according to: 

𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) = − 𝜀𝜕𝐸 (𝑦 ,𝑡 ) 𝜕𝑡  − 𝐽 (𝑡 )⁄ 

> 𝜇𝐸 (𝑦 ,𝑡 )

, (M9 )Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 14/17 where the  𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙  notation  makes explicit the 

derivation of this quantity based on the displacement 

current .

The displacement current method  represents  a

significant technical advantage in terms of data analysis, 

as it allows us to infer the carrier cloud from the 

temporal derivative of the electric field , far less noisy 

than the spatial derivative . The total J(t) contribution in 

Eq. (M9 ) is in general small with respect to the 

displacement term in the region of the electron cloud. 

Therefore, when focusing on the (non -quantitative) 

spatial distribution of the electron cloud, the total 

current can be reasonably neglected , and: 

𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑦 , 𝑡 )~ − 𝜀𝜕𝐸 (𝑦 ,𝑡 ) 𝜕𝑡 ⁄ 

> 𝜇𝐸 (𝑦 ,𝑡 )

. (M10 )

A further s implification in case of relatively uniform 

electric field (or very thin electron cloud) would be to 

neglect  the field  spatial dependence,  which results in a 

direct correspondence between  the shapes of 

𝛿𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙 (𝑦 , 𝑡 ) and  of  the displacement current.  This is 

suitable in the case of low optical photogeneration. 

According to Eq. ( M8 ), the CDPI technique offers, in 

principle, the remarkable opportunity to extract the 

transient current flowing in the external circuit from the 

sum, at any arbitrary point in the detector, of the 

conduction current, related to the spatial derivative of 

th e electric field (and the electric field itself), and the 

displacement current, related to the temporal 

derivative of the electric field. 

As shown in literature 30,31 , a more direct relationship 

current vs  electric  field emerges from the spatial 

integration of  Eq.  (M8 ), taking into account that  J(t) is 

independent on y, that the integral of the displacement 

current term is zero and under the following 

assumptions: 

- Uniform Electric field in absence of carrier 

excess ( 𝜕𝐸 (𝑦 ,𝑡 =0) 

> 𝜕𝑦

=0) 

- Trapping is neglected 

Another implicit assumption is that only  one type of 

carrier is considered. This considered, we obtain: 

𝐽 𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑥 (𝑡 ) = (𝜀𝜇  2𝐿 ⁄ )[𝐸 2(𝐿 , 𝑡 ) − 𝐸 2(0, 𝑡 )]

(M11 )

where , as anticipated,  the dependence on the electric 

field  rather than its derivative and only  in  two  fixed 

points  at the electrodes, is very  useful when feeding this 

into  the  CDPI  technique . With respect to the  above -

mentioned  approximations, we can only partially 

circumvent the first one: the electric field is not  uniform 

due to the presence of a fixed space charge. We add a 

constant baseline to Eq. ( M11 ) to ensure  𝐽 (𝑡  = 0) = 0.

It should be noted  though that  when integrating Eq. 

(M8 ) the presence of a space charge affects the entire 

transient. 

Numerical methods.  1D numerical simulations were 

performed using the semiconductor device simulator 

“Sentaurus”, part of the Technology CAD software 

package provided by Synopsys, Inc. 49 . The basic 

elements of a model that is able to describe the CdTe 

device under applied bias and light in quasi -stationary 

conditions have been previously presented 50  and are 

reported here in full ( Table  S2). In this work, the model 

has been extended to reproduce the experimental 

transients on the electron transit timescale, and, to this 

end, we have included the presence of shallow traps, 

according to the different experimental conditions 

reported in the te xt. We simulated the whole 

experimental flow in the time domain, starting from 

applying bias voltage under dark (according to the 

protocol in  Fig.  S2) and by considering optical pulses 1 

ns long at a frequency of 25  kHz when illumination is 

active. Simulations are performed using the Backward -

Euler method using an adaptive time step for ensuring 

convergence and controlling numerical errors. Data has 

been recorded at 0.5 ns or 1 ns interval, matching the 

experimental resolution to facilitate a direct 

comparison.                     

> Acknowledgments .A.C. is grateful to Massimiliano Zanichelli
> for the initial motivation and inspiration. L.D. wishes to thank
> Francesco Michelotti for the initial inspiration in experimental
> physics, optical nonlinearities and the Teng -Man technique .
> A.C. and L.D. thank Paolo Cazzato for technical support and
> Carlo Giansante for scientific advising . We acknowledge the
> ELPHO laboratory at CNR NANOTEC where all the
> experiments were performed.
> Authors contributions .A.C. and L.D. conceived the idea and
> experimental procedure. A.C. designed and implemented the
> CDPI set -up. L.D. wrote software for experiments control and
> analysis. A.C. conducted the experiments. I.F. helped with the
> set -up. A.C. and L.D. analysed the re sults. A.V. conducted
> numerical simulations. V.D. provided important expertise on
> the electro -optic effect. A.C. and L.D. wrote the manuscript.
> All authors contributed to the discussion and interpretation
> of the data and revised the manuscript.

Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 15/17 References 

1.  Abel, S.  et al.  Large Pockels effect in micro - and nanostructured barium titanate integrated on silicon.  Nat. Mater.  18 , 42 –47 

(2019). 

2.  Alexander, K.  et al.  Nanophotonic Pockels modulators on a silicon nitride platform.  Nat. Commun.  9, 3444 (2018). 

3.  Powell, K.  et al.  Integrated silicon carbide electro -optic modulator.  Nat. Commun.  13 , 1851 (2022). 

4.  Thomaschewski, M. & Bozhevolnyi, S. I. Pockels modulation in integrated nanophotonics.  Appl. Phys. Rev.  9, 021311 (2022). 

5.  Kolner, B. & Bloom, D. Electrooptic sampling in GaAs integrated circuits.  IEEE J. Quantum Electron.  22 , 79 –93 (1986). 

6.  Donaldson, W. R., Kingsley, L., Weiner, M., Kim, A. & Zeto, R. Electro -optic imaging of the internal fields in a GaAs 

photoconductive switch.  J. Appl. Phys.  68 , 6453 –6457 (1990). 

7.  Peterkin, F. E., Block, R. & Schoenbach, K. H. Electric field mapping system with nanosecond temporal resolution.  Rev. Sci. 

Instrum.  66 , 2960 –2966 (1995). 

8.  Ito, H.  et al.  High -Speed and High -Output InP –InGaAs Unitraveling -Carrier Photodiodes.  IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 

10 , 709 –727 (2004). 

9.  Currie, M.  et al.  Performance Enhancement of a GaAs Detector with a Vertical Field and an Embedded Thin Low -

Temperature Grown Layer.  Sensors  13 , 2475 –2483 (2013). 

10.  Dědič, V.  et al.  Mapping of inhomogeneous quasi -3D electrostatic field in electro -optic materials.  Sci. Rep.  11 , 2154 (2021). 

11.  Cola, A., Dominici, L. & Valletta, A. Optical Writing and Electro -Optic Imaging of Reversible Space Charges in Semi -Insulating 

CdTe Diodes.  Sensors  22 , 1579 (2022). 

12.  Sima, W.  et al.  Time -continuous Kerr electro -optic field mapping measurement under impulse voltage using array 

photodetector.  Appl. Phys. Lett.  107 , 082901 (2015). 

13.  Bhattacharya, P., Yu, P. & Guha, S. Nonlinear Optical Imaging of Carrier Transport at the Semiconductor -Insulator Interface 

in Organic Field -Effect Transistors.  Phys. Rev. Appl.  19 , 044059 (2023). 

14.  Shyam, R., Manaka, T. & Prakash, R. Direct Visualization of Carrier Motion in DPP -TTT/C 3 N5 Blended Organic Thin -Film 

Transistors by Optical Second -Harmonic Generation.  ACS Appl. Nano Mater.  8, 10754 –10764 (2025). 

15.  Cao, Y., Pomeroy, J. W., Uren, M. J., Yang, F. & Kuball, M. Electric field mapping of wide -bandgap semiconductor devices at a 

submicrometre resolution.  Nat. Electron.  4, 478 –485 (2021). 

16.  Yin Win, L. L., Taguchi, D. & Manaka, T. Transient carrier visualization of organic -inorganic hybrid perovskite thin films by 

using time -resolved microscopic second -harmonic generation (TRM -SHG).  Org. Electron.  75 , 105416 (2019). 

17.  Manaka, T., Lim, E., Tamura, R. & Iwamoto, M. Direct imaging of carrier motion in organic transistors by optical second -

harmonic generation.  Nat. Photonics  1, 581 –584 (2007). 

18.  Man, M. K. L.  et al.  Imaging the motion of electrons across semiconductor heterojunctions.  Nat. Nanotechnol.  12 , 36 –40 

(2017). 

19.  Terada, Y., Yoshida, S., Takeuchi, O. & Shigekawa, H. Real -space imaging of transient carrier dynamics by nanoscale pump –

probe microscopy.  Nat. Photonics  4, 869 –874 (2010). 

20.  Son, B. H.  et al.  Imaging Ultrafast Carrier Transport in Nanoscale Field -Effect Transistors.  ACS Nano  8, 11361 –11368 (2014). 

21.  Gabriel, M. M.  et al.  Direct Imaging of Free Carrier and Trap Carrier Motion in Silicon Nanowires by Spatially -Separated 

Femtosecond Pump –Probe Microscopy.  Nano Lett.  13 , 1336 –1340 (2013). 

22.  Sirotin, M. A.  et al.  Direct ultrafast carrier imaging in a perovskite microlaser with optical coherence microscopy.  Optica  10 ,

1322 (2023). 

23.  Simeni, M. S., Zheng, Y., Barnat, E. V. & Bruggeman, P. J. Townsend to glow discharge transition for a nanosecond pulse 

plasma in helium: space charge formation and resulting electric field dynamics.  Plasma Sources Sci. Technol.  30 , 055004 

(2021). 

24.  Jian Shi  et al.  Space charge dynamics investigation based on Kerr electro -optic measurements and processing of CCD 

images.  IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul.  20 , 601 –611 (2013). 

25.  Horng, J.  et al.  Imaging electric field dynamics with graphene optoelectronics.  Nat. Commun.  7, 13704 (2016). 

26.  Sridharan, A.  et al.  Time -resolved imaging of carrier transport in halide perovskite thin films and evidence for nondiffusive 

transport.  Phys. Rev. Mater.  3, 125403 (2019). 

27.  Li, J.  et al.  Ultrafast Optical Nanoscopy of Carrier Dynamics in Silicon Nanowires.  Nano Lett.  23 , 1445 –1450 (2023). 

28.  Sun, J., Adhikari, A., Shaheen, B. S., Yang, H. & Mohammed, O. F. Mapping Carrier Dynamics on Material Surfaces in Space 

and Time using Scanning Ultrafast Electron Microscopy.  J. Phys. Chem. Lett.  7, 985 –994 (2016). 

29.  Wang, L., Nughays, R. & Mohammed, O. F. Spatiotemporal imaging of photogenerated charge carriers in optoelectronic 

materials.  Matter  8, 102423 (2025). 

30.  Weisz, S. Z., Cobas, A., Trester, S. & Many, A. Electrode -Limited and Space -Charge -Limited Transient Currents in Insulators. 

J. Appl. Phys.  39 , 2296 –2302 (1968). 

31.  Batra, I. P. & Seki, H. Photocurrents Due to Pulse Illumination in the Presence of Trapping.  J. Appl. Phys.  41 , 3409 –3415 

(1970). 

32.  Cola, A. & Farella, I. CdTe X -ray detectors under strong optical irradiation.  Appl. Phys. Lett.  105 , 203501 (2014). 

33.  Cola, A., Farella, I., Pousset, J. & Valletta, A. On the relation between deep level compensation, resistivity and electric f ield 

in semi -insulating CdTe:Cl radiation detectors.  Semicond. Sci. Technol.  31 , 12LT01 (2016). 

34.  Gatti, E., Longoni, A., Rehak, P. & Sampietro, M. Dynamics of electrons in drift detectors.  Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. 

Sect. Accel. Spectrometers Detect. Assoc. Equip.  253 , 393 –399 (1987). Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 16/17 35.  Benoit, M. & Hamel, L. A. Simulation of charge collection processes in semiconductor CdZnTe γ  -ray detectors.  Nucl. 

Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. Accel. Spectrometers Detect. Assoc. Equip.  606 , 508 –516 (2009). 

36.  Suzuki, K., Ichinohe, Y. & Seto, S. Effect of Intense Optical Excitation on Internal Electric Field Evolution in CdTe Gamma -Ray 

Detectors.  J. Electron. Mater.  47 , 4332 –4337 (2018). 

37.  Bale, D. S. & Szeles, C. Nature of polarization in wide -bandgap semiconductor detectors under high -flux irradiation: 

Application to semi -insulating Cd 1 − x Zn x Te.  Phys. Rev. B  77 , 035205 (2008). 

38.  Many, A. & Rakavy, G. Theory of Transient Space -Charge -Limited Currents in Solids in the Presence of Trapping.  Phys. Rev. 

126 , 1980 –1988 (1962). 

39.  Gibbons, D. J. & Papadakis, A. C. Transient space -charge perturbed currents in orthorhombic sulphur.  J. Phys. Chem. Solids 

29 , 115 –121 (1968). 

40.  Christen, T. The effect of injection properties of contacts on the dynamics of unipolar space -charge limited currents.  IEEE 

Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul.  23 , 3712 –3724 (2016). 

41.  Papadakis, A. C. Theory of transient space -charge perturbed currents in insulators.  J. Phys. Chem. Solids  28 , 641 –647 (1967). 

42.  Farella, I., Montagna, G., Mancini, A. M. & Cola, A. Study on Instability Phenomena in CdTe Diode -Like Detectors.  IEEE Trans. 

Nucl. Sci.  56 , 1736 –1742 (2009). 

43.  A. Castoldi, P. Zambon. Simulation of the 3 -D Coulomb explosion of the electron -hole distribution at high injection levels in 

2-D semiconductor detectors. in  2013 IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium and Medical Imaging Conference (2013 NSS/MIC)  1–

6 (IEEE, Seoul, Korea (South), 2013). doi:10.1109/NSSMIC.2013.6829567. 

44.  Wurm, P., Hage -Ali, M., Koebel, J. M. & Siffert, P. Study of the photodecay in CdTe X -ray detectors.  Mater. Sci. Eng. B  28 ,

47 –50 (1994). 

45.  Kamieniecki, E. Effect of charge trapping on effective carrier lifetime in compound semiconductors: High resistivity CdZnTe. 

J. Appl. Phys.  116 , 193702 (2014). 

46.  Zahraman, K.  et al.  Study of the thickness of the dead Layer below electrodes, deposited by electroless technique, in CdTe 

nuclear detectors.  IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci.  53 , 378 –382 (2006). 

47.  Yariv, A.  Optical Electronics . (Saunders College Publ, Fort Worth, 1991). 

48.  Bylsma, R. B., Bridenbaugh, P. M., Olson, D. H. & Glass, A. M. Photorefractive properties of doped cadmium telluride.  Appl. 

Phys. Lett.  51 , 889 –891 (1987). 

49.  Sentaurus Device —An Advanced Multidimensional (1D/2D/3D) Device Simulator. Available online: https://www.synopsys. 

com/silicon/tcad/device -simulation/sentaurus -device.html (accessed on ... February 2026). 

50.  Cola, A., Dominici, L. & Valletta, A. Electric -Field Mapping of Optically Perturbed CdTe Radiation Detectors.  Sensors  23 , 4795 

(2023). Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices 17/17 Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices - SI 1/7 

# SUPPLEMENTA L INFORMATION 

# Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative 

# Semiconductor Devices 

Adriano Cola 1, *, Antonio Valletta 2, Isabella Farella 1, Vaclav Dědič 3, Lorenzo Dominici 4, * 

> 1

CNR IMM, Institute for Microelectronics and Microsystems, Via Monteroni, 73100 Lecce, Italy  

> 2

CNR IMM, Institute for Microelectronics and Microsystems, Via Del Fosso Del Cavaliere, 100, 

00133 Roma, Italy  

> 3

Institute of Physics, Charles University, Ke Karlovu 5, 121 16 Prague, Czech Republic  

> 4

CNR NANOTEC, Institute of Nanotechnology, Via Monteroni, 73100 Lecce, Italy 

*adriano.cola@cnr.it, lorenzo.dominici@nanotec.cnr.it 

# __________________________________________________________________ 

# Content :

# Table  S1,  S2

# Figures  S1-S3

# Caption to  Video s S1 -S4 

# References Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices - SI 2/7 

Free carrier 

imaging 

1D/2D 

Electric field 

Imaging 

1D/2D 

> Electrical
> / Optical
> induced
> transient
> Time step or
> resolution

Time 

range 

Spatial 

step or 

resolution 

Spatial 

range 

approach  Physical effect  System 

(Nanostructure/ Film / 

Bulk) 

Reference 

Year 

2D 

(1D symmetry) 

2D 

(quantitative) 

O 1 ns  10  μs 10  μm 1 cm  Pump/probe 

imaging 

Pockels effect  CdTe Radiation 

detector (B) 

Present 

work 

2D 

(quantitative) 

O 200  ps  1 ns  3 μm 1 cm  Pump/probe 

imaging 

Pockels effect  Surface of Photo -

conductive GaAs switch 

(F) 

[1]  1990 

1D 

(quantitative) 

E 0.2  ns  500  ns  70  μm 50  mm  Single shot streak 

camera 

Pockels effect  Surface Electrical 

discharge in BGO 

crystal (B) 

[2]  2002 

2D 

(quantitative) 

E min  = 80  μs 300  μs N.A.  3 mm  Pulse/delay 

imaging 

Kerr effect  Liquid insulator (B)  [3]  2013 

1D 

(quantitative) 

E 100  μs 2 ms  N.A.  3 mm  Single shot 

imaging 

Kerr effect  Liquid dielectric 

(propylene carbonate) 

[4]  2015 

1D*  1D  E 1 μs 70  μs N.A.  80  μm Pump/probe 

imaging 

Second harmonic 

generation 

Perovskite FET (F)  [5]  2019 

2D*  1D  E 500  ns  3 μs N.A.  50  μm Pump/probe 

imaging 

Second harmonic 

generation 

Pentacene TFT (F)  [6]  2023 

2D  E 100  ns  400  ns  N.A.  40  μm Pump/probe 

imaging 

Second harmonic 

generation 

Pentacene TFT (F)  [7]  2007 

2D  E 100  ns  500  ns  ≈ μm ≈ mm  Pump/probe 

imaging 

Second harmonic 

generation 

Organic blend TFT (F)  [8]  2025 

2D 

(quantitative) 

E

(Steady) 

N.A.  N.A.  0.8  μm 20  μm Scanning 

Microscopy 

Second harmonic 

generation 

GaN HEMT (F)  [9]  2021 

2D  O ≈ 200 fs  100  ps  0.25  μm tens of  μm Pump/probe 

imaging 

Photoemission 

electron microscopy 

(spectral) 

Semiconductor 

heterojunction (F) 

[10]  2017 

2D 

(recombination 

dynamics) 

O ≈ 140  fs  1 μs < nm 

(resolution 

of STM) 

20  nm  Pump/probe 

microscopy 

Scanning tunneling 

current 

Cobalt nanoparticle 

/GaAs structure (N) 

[11]  2010 

1D  O 2 ps  600  ps  Diffraction 

limited 

4 μm Pump/probe 

microscopy 

Photo -Current 

transient 

Nanowire FET (N)  [12]  2014 

2D 

(recombination 

dynamics) 

O 0.5  ps  12.5  ns  Diffraction 

limited 

10  μm Scanning 

Pump/probe 

microscopy 

Transient Absorption  Nanowire (N)  [13]  2013 

2D 

(recombination 

dynamics) 

O 2 fs  100  fs  10  nm  several 

μm

Pump/probe 

mapping 

Transient Absorption  Perovskite (F)  [14]  2020 

2D  E 2.5  ps  40  ns  5 μm 1.9  mm  pulse/delay 

imaging 

Franz -Keldish effect  Photoconductive GaAs 

switch (B) 

[15]  1995 

2D 

(recombination 

dynamics) 

O 1 ps  500  ps  0.5  μm 5 μm Optical coherence 

and Pump/probe 

microscopy 

e-h+ plasma induced 

n modulation 

Perovskite Laser (F)  [16]  2023 

2D 

(quantitative) 

O 3 ns  300  ns  22  μm 3.5  mm  Gated camera  Stark polarization 

spectroscopy 

Helium Gas  [17]  2021 

2D  E 5 ms  200  ms  tens of  μm ≈ 250  μm Single shot 

microscopy 

absorption 

modulation in 

graphene 

Liquid Solution  [18]  2016 

1D 

(recombination 

dynamics) 

O 50  ps  7 μs Diffraction 

limited 

4 μm Streak camera 

imaging 

photoluminescence  Perovskite (F)  [19]  2019 

2D 

(recombination 

dynamics) 

O ≈ ps  1 ns  35  nm  ≈ 10  μm Pump/probe 

scanning near field 

optical microscopy 

photoluminescence  Silicon Nanowire (N)  [20]  2023 

2D 

(recombination 

dynamics) 

O 650  fs  6 ns  5 nm  ≈ 200  μm Pump/probe 

imaging 

Secondary electron 

Microscopy 

Semiconductor surface 

(B, N) 

[21]  2016 

2D 

(diffusion 

dynamics) 

O 1.2  ps  2 ns  5 nm  ≈ 150  μm Pump/probe 

imaging 

Secondary electron 

Microscopy 

Perovskite surface (F)  [22]  2025 

*The authors report 2D maps which refer to 1D distribution. 

Table  S1. A review of  papers addressing the dynamics of free carrier and/or Electric Field imaging . The first 

three columns indicate: if the papers report  free carrier imaging  (and if 1D or 2D), electric field  imaging  (if 

1D,  2D and if quantitative) and if the transient is induced electrically or optically.  Remaining columns address 

characterizing features like spatial and temporal resolution, the approach , the experimental method  as well 

as the investigated system. Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices - SI 3/7 

Table  S2. List of main parameters used in the numerical simulations. The set of shallow and deep levels used 

for the different cases simulated are highlighted by colored boxes. 

CdTe material 

Fixed Charge 

> Fig.  5c  (low optical power) and  Fig.  5d  (high optical power)
> Fig.  5f  (high optical power)
> Fig.  5g  (high optical power)

Fully ionized  shallow donor level  Concentration N d 2. 8x10 13  cm -3

Acceptor deep level 

(low and high optical excitation) 

Energy E c-Ea 0.725  eV

Concentration N a 5.8x10 13  cm-3

Electr. capture cross section  σea  1x10 -18  cm2

Hole capture cross section  σha  1.5x10 -19  cm2

Electron Trapping time  1.7  ms

Electron Detrapping time  7x10 3 s

Hole Trapping time  11  ms 

Hole Detrapping time  5x10 4 s

Shallow electron trap 

(low and high optical excitation) 

Energy E c-Et 0.020  eV 

Concentration N t 1.0x10 16  cm-3

Electr. capture cross section  σea  1x10 -17  cm2

Electron  Trapping time  1000  ns

Electron  Detrapping time  1 ns 

Shallow hole trap 

(low and high optical excitation) 

Energy E t-Ev 0.100  eV 

Concentration N t 1.0x10 15  cm-3

Electr. capture cross section  σea  1x10 -16  cm2

Hole  Trapping time  1000  ns 

Hole  Detrapping time  2.2  ns

Electron trap 

(high optical excitation) 

Energy E v-Et 0.336  eV 

Concentration N t 1.0x10 12  cm-3

Electr. capture cross section  σea  2x10 -12  cm2

Electron  Trapping time  50  ns 

Electron  Detrapping time  1 ns 

> Fig.  5g  (high optical power)

Electron trap at the electrodes 

(high optical excitation) 

Energy E c-Et 0.150  eV 

Gaussian concentration peak 

(at the electrode) N t

1.0x10 18 cm -3

Width of Gaussian distribution  t 5m

Electr. capture cross section  σet  1x10 -14 cm 2

Electron  Trapping time  0.01ns 

Electron  Detrapping time  0.15ns 

Other material parameters 

Electron mobility  1050 cm 2/(Vs) 

Hole mobility  80 cm 2 /(Vs) 

Absorption coefficient  Ref.  [23] 

Radiative recombination coefficient  2.5x10 -10 cm 3s-1

Pt/CdTe/Pt ohmic detector 

Pt/CdTe  electron barrier  ΦIn  0.8  eV 

Other parameters 

Temperature  300  KDirect Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices - SI 4/7 

Fig.  S1 Normalized  optical generation rate into CdTe  as a function of the distance from the irradiated cathode 

for the incident radiation of present experiments (range 780 -830  nm). The curve is calculated according to 

the CdTe absorption coefficient  [23] .

Fig.  S2 a)  Illustration of the  typical  protocol  for CDPI experiments . In the  panel it  is reported the e volution of 

electric field at  both  cathode  (black circles)  and anode  (red squares)  during  the  voltage sweep  and 

conditioning  under  dark, optical irradiation, dark and voltage sweep back to 0  V. The experimental p oints 

here  refer  to  acquisitions  carried out with a continuous LED probe source ( plus a  narrowband filter at 980 

nm) . The  CDPI acquisitions are carried out after 20  min  of  conditioning under  light.  b) Electric  field profiles 

under dark  from the same set of measurements , just before optical irradiation ( t1) and under optical 

irradiation, just before CDPI acquisitions ( t2).0 5 10 15 20 

> 0,0
> 0,2
> 0,4
> 0,6
> 0,8
> 1,0
> Optical Generation Rate (a.u.)
> Distance from Cathode ( m)

Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices - SI 5/7 

a)  b) c) 

Fig.  S3 Simulations of electron, hole and  total  (sum of the  previous  two) conduction  currents at three selected 

positions inside the device  near  the cathode:  0.5  m (a), 1  m (b), and  10  m (c). When very close to cathode, 

hole contribution becomes comparable or greater than  the  electron  one  and results in a steeper  total 

conduction  current increase.  At more than  few  m away from cathode holes are less effective, but their 

contribution last longer than electrons because of their lower mobility. 

Caption to Videos S1 -S4 

Video S1 . Temporal evolution of the transmittance difference maps T(x,y,t + dt)  - T(x,y,t ) similarly to Fig. 1b, 

over 80 ns time range and with a step of 1 ns (the interval for differences is taken as dt = 2 ns). The moving 

strip is representative of the drifting electron cloud. The three cases refer to increasing optical irradiation 

powers, l eft to right, corresponding respectively to P 4, P 6, and P 8 discussed in Fig. 3. The applied voltage is 

200 V. The colour -scale is set between  -0.02 and +0.02 among all the maps to allow visual comparison and 

to optimize the strip contrast. The two horizontal solid black lines represent the cathode (top) and anode 

(bottom) electrodes. 

Video S2 . Electric field profile (black line) and its relative variation [E(y, t) -E(y, t=0) ] / E( y, t=0) (orange line) 

as in Fig. 2, time evolution over 60 ns (time step 0.5 ns). The y -profiles (from cathode to anode) have been 

calculated by averaging on the x -direction, along which the field is uniform. Data refer to the low optical 

irradiation case  (same as  Fig. 2c and P 4 in Fig. 3). 

Video S3 . Temporal evolution of displacement currents moving from cathode to anode over 125 ns (time 

step 1  ns) at different applied voltages: 50 V (green),  100 V (yellow),  150 V (red), and 200 V (blu ) in the case 

of low optical irradiation (Fig. 2 d and P 4 in Fig. 3). In this low power case, the  displacement  current peak is 

Gaussian and representative of the electron cloud  position and shape .

Video S4 . Temporal evolution of carrier cloud profiles over a 72 ns time range (time step 1 ns) under 

different optical irradiation levels as in Fig.  3f. The excitation optical density is increasing from low to high 

perturbation as P 2 (brown), P 4 (yellow), P 6 (blue), P 8 (red). The applied bias is 200 V. By increasing optical 

irradiation level, the carrier clouds reshape from purely Gaussian to bi -Gaussian with more extended tail 

than front. 0 10 20 30 40         

> 0,00
> 0,05
> 0,10
> 0,15
> 0,20
> current (A)
> time (ns)
> I_e @0.5um I_h @0.5um I_cond @0.5um 010 20 30 40
> 0,00
> 0,05
> 0,10
> 0,15
> 0,20
> current (A)
> time (ns)
> I_e @1um I_h @1um I_cond @1um 010 20 30 40
> 0,00
> 0,05
> 0,10
> 0,15
> 0,20
> current (A)
> time (ns)
> I_e @10um I_h @10um I_cond @10um

Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices - SI 6/7 

REFERENCES 

[1]  W. R. Donaldson, L. Kingsley, M. Weiner, A. Kim, e R. Zeto, «Electro -optic imaging of the internal fields 

in a GaAs photoconductive switch»,  J. Appl. Phys. , vol. 68, fasc. 12, pp. 6453 –6457, dic. 1990, doi: 

10.1063/1.346843. 

[2]  A. Kumada, T. Sugihara, M. Chiba, e K. Hidaka, «Two -dimensional potential distribution measurement 

of surface discharge with subnanosecond resolution»,  Rev. Sci. Instrum. , vol. 73, fasc. 4, pp. 1939 –

1944, apr. 2002, doi: 10.1063/1.1458042. 

[3]  Jian Shi, Qing Yang, Wenxia Sima, Lei Liao, Sisi Huang, e M. Zahn, «Space charge dynamics 

investigation based on Kerr electro -optic measurements and processing of CCD images»,  IEEE Trans. 

Dielectr. Electr. Insul. , vol. 20, fasc. 2, pp. 601 –611, apr. 2013, doi: 10.1109/TDEI.2013.6508764. 

[4]  W. Sima, H. Song, Q. Yang, H. Guo, M. Zahn, e M. Yang, «Time -continuous Kerr electro -optic field 

mapping measurement under impulse voltage using array photodetector»,  Appl. Phys. Lett. , vol. 107, 

fasc. 8, p. 082901, ago. 2015, doi: 10.1063/1.4929504. 

[5]  L. L. Yin Win, D. Taguchi, e T. Manaka, «Transient carrier visualization of organic -inorganic hybrid 

perovskite thin films by using time -resolved microscopic second -harmonic generation (TRM -SHG)», 

Org. Electron. , vol. 75, p. 105416, dic. 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.orgel.2019.105416. 

[6]  P. Bhattacharya, P. Yu, e S. Guha, «Nonlinear Optical Imaging of Carrier Transport at the 

Semiconductor -Insulator Interface in Organic Field -Effect Transistors»,  Phys. Rev. Appl. , vol. 19, fasc. 

4, p. 044059, apr. 2023, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevApplied.19.044059. 

[7]  T. Manaka, E. Lim, R. Tamura, e M. Iwamoto, «Direct imaging of carrier motion in organic transistors 

by optical second -harmonic generation»,  Nat. Photonics , vol. 1, fasc. 10, pp. 581 –584, ott. 2007, doi: 

10.1038/nphoton.2007.172. 

[8]  R. Shyam, T. Manaka, e R. Prakash, «Direct Visualization of Carrier Motion in DPP -TTT/C 3 N5 Blended 

Organic Thin -Film Transistors by Optical Second -Harmonic Generation»,  ACS Appl. Nano Mater. , vol. 

8, fasc. 20, pp. 10754 –10764, mag. 2025, doi: 10.1021/acsanm.4c06896. 

[9]  Y. Cao, J. W. Pomeroy, M. J. Uren, F. Yang, e M. Kuball, «Electric field mapping of wide -bandgap 

semiconductor devices at a submicrometre resolution»,  Nat. Electron. , vol. 4, fasc. 7, pp. 478 –485, 

giu. 2021, doi: 10.1038/s41928 -021 -00599 -5. 

[10]  M. K. L. Man  et al. , «Imaging the motion of electrons across semiconductor heterojunctions»,  Nat. 

Nanotechnol. , vol. 12, fasc. 1, pp. 36 –40, gen. 2017, doi: 10.1038/nnano.2016.183. 

[11]  Y. Terada, S. Yoshida, O. Takeuchi, e H. Shigekawa, «Real -space imaging of transient carrier dynamics 

by nanoscale pump –probe microscopy»,  Nat. Photonics , vol. 4, fasc. 12, pp. 869 –874, dic. 2010, doi: 

10.1038/nphoton.2010.235. 

[12]  B. H. Son, J. -K. Park, J. T. Hong, J. -Y. Park, S. Lee, e Y. H. Ahn, «Imaging Ultrafast Carrier Transport in 

Nanoscale Field -Effect Transistors»,  ACS Nano , vol. 8, fasc. 11, pp. 11361 –11368, nov. 2014, doi: 

10.1021/nn5042619. 

[13]  M. M. Gabriel  et al. , «Direct Imaging of Free Carrier and Trap Carrier Motion in Silicon Nanowires by 

Spatially -Separated Femtosecond Pump –Probe Microscopy»,  Nano Lett. , vol. 13, fasc. 3, pp. 1336 –

1340, mar. 2013, doi: 10.1021/nl400265b. 

[14]  J. Sung, S. Macpherson, e A. Rao, «Enhanced Ballistic Transport of Charge Carriers in Alloyed and K -

Passivated Alloyed Perovskites Thin Films». 

[15]  F. E. Peterkin, R. Block, e K. H. Schoenbach, «Electric field mapping system with nanosecond temporal 

resolution»,  Rev. Sci. Instrum. , vol. 66, fasc. 4, pp. 2960 –2966, apr. 1995, doi: 10.1063/1.1145583. 

[16]  M. A. Sirotin  et al. , «Direct ultrafast carrier imaging in a perovskite microlaser with optical coherence 

microscopy»,  Optica , vol. 10, fasc. 10, p. 1322, ott. 2023, doi: 10.1364/OPTICA.498746. 

[17]  M. S. Simeni, Y. Zheng, E. V. Barnat, e P. J. Bruggeman, «Townsend to glow discharge transition for a 

nanosecond pulse plasma in helium: space charge formation and resulting electric field dynamics», 

Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. , vol. 30, fasc. 5, p. 055004, mag. 2021, doi: 10.1088/1361 -6595/abf320. 

[18]  J. Horng  et al. , «Imaging electric field dynamics with graphene optoelectronics»,  Nat. Commun. , vol. 7, 

fasc. 1, p. 13704, dic. 2016, doi: 10.1038/ncomms13704. Direct Spatiotemporal Imaging of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Operative Semiconductor Devices - SI 7/7 

[19]  A. Sridharan, N. K. Noel, H. Hwang, S. Hafezian, B. P. Rand, e S. Kéna -Cohen, «Time -resolved imaging 

of carrier transport in halide perovskite thin films and evidence for nondiffusive transport»,  Phys. Rev. 

Mater. , vol. 3, fasc. 12, p. 125403, dic. 2019, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.3.125403. 

[20]  J. Li  et al. , «Ultrafast Optical Nanoscopy of Carrier Dynamics in Silicon Nanowires»,  Nano Lett. , vol. 23, 

fasc. 4, pp. 1445 –1450, feb. 2023, doi: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.2c04790. 

[21]  J. Sun, A. Adhikari, B. S. Shaheen, H. Yang, e O. F. Mohammed, «Mapping Carrier Dynamics on 

Material Surfaces in Space and Time using Scanning Ultrafast Electron Microscopy»,  J. Phys. Chem. 

Lett. , vol. 7, fasc. 6, pp. 985 –994, mar. 2016, doi: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02908. 

[22]  L. Wang  et al. , «Real -space imaging of photo -generated surface carrier transport in 2D perovskites», 

Light Sci. Appl. , vol. 14, fasc. 1, p. 124, mar. 2025, doi: 10.1038/s41377 -025 -01758 -5. 

[23]  A. Cola, I. Farella, M. Anni, e M. C. Martucci, «Charge Transients by Variable Wavelength Optical 

Pulses in CdTe Nuclear Detectors»,  IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. , vol. 59, fasc. 4, pp. 1569 –1574, ago. 2012, 

doi: 10.1109/TNS.2012.2194509.