Title: 2604.27777v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.27777v1

Published Time: Fri, 01 May 2026 00:53:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
YOSO: single -frame Gerchberg -Saxton phase retrieval 

# with AI -based data augmentation for in -line 

# holography 

Julianna Winnik 1,* , Adam Walocha 1, Wojciech Ogonowski 2, Wiktor Forjasz 1, Piotr Arcab 1,

Mikołaj  Rogalski 1, Aleksandra Rutkowska 3, Marzena Stefaniuk 4, Jos é Ángel Picazo -

Bueno 5,6 , Vicente  Micó 6, Maciej Trusiak 1, Maria Cywińska 1,* 

> 1

Institute of Micromechanics and Photonics, Faculty of Mechatronics,  Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, 

Poland 

> 2

Institute of  Automatic Control and Robotics , Faculty of Mechatronics, Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, 

Poland 

> 3

Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland 

> 4

Laboratory of Neurobiology, BRAINCITY, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology of Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland 

> 5

Biomedical Technology Center, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany 

> 6

Department of Optics and Optometry and Vision Sciences, Physics Faculty, University of Valencia, Burjassot, Spain 

*Author s to whom any correspondence should be addressed. 

E-mail:  julianna.winnik@pw.edu.pl , maria.cywinska@pw.edu.pl 

Abstract 

We present YOSO  (You Only Shot Once) , a single -frame phase retrieval framework for digital in -line 

holographic microscopy (DIHM)  in which  supervised deep learning is used to numerically generate an 

additional hologram  corresponding to  different  defocus  distance, creating a so -called multi -height 

dataset, which is then  conventionally  processed with a well -established Gerchberg -Saxton  (GS) 

algorithm . YOSO is trained on computer -generated data derived from natural images, enabling strong 

generalization . The selected multi -scale ResNet architectu re enables rapid training in under two hours 

on a mid -range workstation , which is done only once , enabling efficient inference thereafter.  We further 

show that  YOSO’s network  can  process inputs of varying spatial dimensions, allowing training on small 

inputs and direct inference on full -sized holograms  while  bypassing  patch -and -stitch procedure.  A

further advantage of YOSO is its physics -consistent hologram padding, which replaces conventional 

zero or edge -value padding with a physically grounded approach compatible with the GS framework. 

The YOSO framework is tested on various systems (lens -based and lensless DIHM) and diverse 

samples: a resolution test target , adherent and suspend ed biological cells, and  a mouse brain  slice . The 

results show that YOSO is compatible with 3D objects and correctly recover s defocused  object wave 

features, enabling holographic  post processing  such as  numerical refocusing.  The results of this work are 

available publicly as software for end -to -end implementation. 

Keywords:  in -line holography, lensless holography, deep learning, ResNet, Gerchberg -Saxton, phase retrieval 

1.  Introduction 

Quantitative phase imaging (QPI)  [1]  is a group  of  optical imaging technique s that measure the phase shift of light passing through a 

sample , providing access  to its structural and physical properties. By converting phase variations into quantitative  information , QPI enables 

label -free analysis of transparent specimens.  Numerical phase  retrieval  can be  performed using  various  non -interferometric  approaches , such 

as  Fourier Ptychographic Microscopy  [2] , Transport of Intensity Equation  [3] , quantitative Differential Phase Contrast  [4] , and Kramers -

Kronig  relation  [5] , each  associated  with  specific  numerical and instrumental limitations . Other  well -established QPI methods rely on the 

interferometric superposition of  at least  two beams,  offering  high accuracy  while  typically  requiring  sophisticated instrumentation  [6,7] .An alternative and increasingly attractive  QPI approach is digital in -line holographic microscopy (DIHM)  [8] , which  relies on  a single 

light  beam  and  retrieves phase information via  defocused acquisition  that translates  phase  variations  into measurable intensity  changes . Based 

on this principle, DIHM setups are simple and compact, with  the  complexity  of phase retrieval  shifted from hardware to software, reflecting 

the broader trend toward computational  imaging . A prominent example of DIHM is lensless microscopy  [9] , in which  imaging is  performed 

fully holographically  without  any  conventional optical components  and thus  avoiding  the problems related to  aberrations,  typical  optical 

resolution limitations and  the system  bulkiness . DIHM has been applied  in various biomedical  scenarios , e.g.,  high -throughput cell s imaging 

[10] , mobile -phone -based diagnostics  [11] , sperm monitoring  [12] , tomographic  imaging of  fragments of  tissue s [13] , and  commercial 

biomedical systems  [14,15] . It has  also been  used  for  the inspection of technical  components , including diffractive intraocular lens 

profilometry  [16] . Removing  traditional optics  enables  lensless microscopy  using  non -visible  light  [17,18]  or even  non -optical  radiation , such 

as  X-ray s [19]  and  terahertz  radiation  [20] .

The main numerical challenge  of  DIHM is retriev al of  phase information from the recorded  defocused  intensity  data . Traditionally, this is 

done using Gabor  theory  [21] , which interprets the captured image as an interference pattern formed by the superposition of  the  scattered and 

unscattered  components  of the  wave field . While simple and computationally efficient,  the Gabor  approach  suffers from the twin -image 

effect,  in which  an out -of -focus conjugate image overlaps with the true image , degrading  the  reconstruction quality.  Other single -frame 

solution is based on regularization, where the phase retrieval is achieved by exploring a priori knowledge about the sample  [22] . More broadly 

applicable and accurate phase retrieval typically requires recording multiple intensity images under varying system parameter s [23] , i.e., 

different imaging distances  [24 –27]  or illumination wavelengths  [13,28,29] . The phase is then recovered using Gerchberg –Saxton  (GS) 

algorithm  [30] , which iteratively propagates the  object beam  between  the  measurement  domains , enforcing the  recorded  intensity constraints 

at each step.  While multi -frame techniques can achieve high accuracy, they reduce acquisition speed and increase system complexity. 

Recent advances in deep learning have enabled new approaches to  single -frame  phase demodulation in DIHM . In  [20,31 –38] , self -

supervised training has been applied, where a deep neural network (DNN) is used as a universal function approximator that mim ic s the 

physical system without prior training on a large paired dataset.  Nevertheless, this approach requires time -consuming optimization performed 

separately for each hologram . In contrast, supervised training enables faster phase retrieval but relies on large datasets with ground -truth 

labels, which are often laborious and costly to obtain  [39] . This challenge can be addressed by using  computer -generated training data  [40 –

42] . Framework  [40]  applies DNN to  correct  the  phase -unwrapping errors in DIHM , while method  [41]  introduce s a twin -image suppression 

method . Th e latter  approach employ s two separate DNNs —one for phase and one for amplitude  processing —which dismiss es  the mutual 

leakage of amplitude -phase information. Additionally,  the DNNs operate  in  the object plane , which inherently favo urs single -plane (thin) 

samples.  Another  method  [42]  employs  a DNN  to  directly  map  hologram -plane intensity to  complex amplitude ; however , this  require s

complex coding, i.e. , here  three output channels  are  used  to encode the  complex field  [42] .

An  interesting approach  [43] , which avoids  the  complex -field coding  problem , uses  deep learning  to  numerically  generat e five  additional 

holograms  of  a given sample  at different  propagation  distances,  forming  a so -called multi -height  holographic  dataset. This dataset is then 

processed  using  a standard multi -height phase retrieval algorithm such as GS. Although promising, the method  [43]  has several limitations. 

In th at  work, the t raining is performed on a small dataset ( 100 images augmented to  400 images)  captured  for a single sample type and 

imaging system,  which  limit s generalization. It employs the  widely used  [31,34 –36,42]  U-Net architecture  [44] , resulting in long training 

time (~18 hours on a GPU -accelerated workstation), which is impractical as  the  training must be performed separately for each sample and 

measurement configuration . Furthermore , due to application of U -Net, input images larger than the training matrix must be split into sub -

images and processed individually during inference , similarly to  [42] . Notably, the method  [43]  was tested on PMMA spheres and pollen 

grains, which are similar in shape, but separate datasets were required for each, highlighting limited network generalization .

In this work we built upon the  promising  seminal idea proposed in  [43]  and address its main challenges.  Our pipeline, called YOSO (You 

Only Shot Once), applies  DNN -based  augmentation of the captured single -frame hologram by generating one auxiliary hologram 

corresponding to different defocus. This hybrid dataset is  then  used as an input to reliable GS  reconstruction process  that provides final 

complex field reconstruction with suppressed twin image  effect . Unlike  [43] , we employ a multi -scale  residual network ( ResNet )

[45,46,41,39]  with residual connections  [47]  to prevent gradient vanishing  and  a multi -path  architecture for efficient multi -scale feature 

processing , which  enables much  faster  training (27 min on high -end and 7 5 min on mid -range  computer  compared to 18 hours train ing 

reported in  [43] ).  Additionally, unlike U -Net, ResNet can process inputs of varying sizes in a single forward pass, eliminating patch -and -

stich procedure , thereby improving both computational efficiency and reconstruction accuracy.  Importantly, w e employ  generic  computer -

generated training data set , which  is  easier to  acquire  yet  provide s excellent  generalization , as  demonstrated  here experimentally using a 

diverse set of  sample s: phase test target, adherent and suspended cells , and  a m ouse  brain slice.  We further highlight two additional advantages 

of YOSO. First, by operating in the defocused plane, YOSO avoids bias toward a specific object plane, making it suitable for  thick samples 

and enabling further holographic processing such as numerical refocusi ng. Second, YOSO produces physics -consistent padding that is aligned 

with the underlying logic of the GS algorithm. 

The  full  pipeline for data generation, training, and inference  is  publicly available  [48]  together with  supporting data  [49] . Through  this 

open -source release, we aim to support the community by advancing high -speed, high -accuracy single -shot DIHM imaging. 

2.  The YOSO Pipeline 

In DIHM, a coherent light source illuminates  a sample , and  the  resulting defocused intensity pattern is recorded  on  a detector. The image 

may be formed with optical magnification (lens -based DIHM) or without lenses  (lensless  configuration ), where magnification  may  arise from diverging illumination but is often unity under quasi –plane -wave illumination.  Here, we evaluate YOSO for both lens -based and lensless 

configurations, each using plane -wave illumination. 

The key feature of DIHM is that  the  complex  object  wave  distribution  𝑢 0 = 𝐴 0exp (𝑖 𝜑 0) at  the sample plane  (𝑧 0 = 0) is encoded in the 

defocused  intensity pattern . In  the widely used  so -called multi -height DIHM approach , at least two intensity patterns ( 𝐼 1, 𝐼 2) corresponding 

to different defocus distances  (𝑧 1, 𝑧 2) are  captured  (Fig. 1) , which enables reliable  phase  reconstruction using the GS algorithm . In the GS 

algorithm , an estimate of the complex object wave is iteratively numerically  propagated , using  e.g.  angular spectrum (AS) method,  between 

the  planes  𝑧 1 and  𝑧 2. At each plane , the  field  amplitude is replaced with the measured  data , √𝐼 1 or  √𝐼 2, respectively.  Thus , ( 𝐼 1, 𝐼 2) impose 

physical constraints, and the phase emerges as the unique solution consistent with these measurements.  Full description of the applied GS 

algorithm can be found in Sec.  6.4. 

YOSO (Fig. 1)  build s on  the  well -established GS concept  but applies single physically  captured in -line hologram  𝐼 1. The second required 

frame is  estimated  with DNN  (multi -scale ResNet  [46] , Sec.  6.2 ),  which is beforehand  trained  to perform diffraction at  𝑧 2 − 𝑧 1 distance via 

supervised  learning  (Sec.  6.3).  The  computer -generated  training dataset is built on natural images  (details in Sec.  6.1) , whose morphological 

diversity provides excellent generalization . Notabl y, training  is  performed only once for a given DIHM setup  with  fixed parameters : recording 

distance  𝑧 1, camera  sampling pitch  Δ,  and  illumination  wavelength λ . The trained model can be then readily applied to multiple measurements 

of diverse samples.  After the inference step, t he two holograms (physically captured  𝐼 1 and DNN  -inferred  𝐼 ̃2) are fed to the conventional GS 

reconstruction  that  estimates the  object phase at  the plane  𝑧 1. Th e phase  solution  is combined with the physically captured amplitude  (√𝐼 1)

and, finally, the optical field at the object plane is evaluated via numerical  back  propagation using  AS  method  [50] .        

> Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the YOSO framework. Supervised training of multi -scale ResNet using computer -generated training data enables
> estimation of second defocused hologram 𝐼 ̃2

, based on  the  physically  captured hologram  𝐼 1. The pair of holograms  is used as input to conventional    

> Gerchber g-Saxton (GS) algorithm , which , finally, retrieve sthe object wave 𝑢 ̃𝑜 .

3. Results 

3.1 Simulation study 

The performance of YOSO  is  tested with  a simulation (Fig. 2). We  modelled  a pure phase object with a phase distribution  (Fig. 2(g) )

based on the stinkbug image , from  Matplotlib  [51]  sample data . Using the AS method, we  simulated  two in -line holograms : 𝐼 1 (Fig. 2(a)) and 

𝐼 2 (used  here just for  reference ). We assumed that the light source is located far away from the sample resulting in plane wave illumination. 

The simulation parameters —𝑧 1 = 3.56 mm,  𝑧 2 = 11.78 mm,  sampling pitch  Δ 2.4 μm, light wavelength λ  = 0.561 μm  —were selected to 

match the experimental conditions described in  the  next section .

Following  YOSO pipeline, hologram  𝐼 1was inputted to  the  trained DNN model , which  estimated the  second hologram  𝐼 ̃2 (Fig. 2(c)). Then ,

the holographic pair  (𝐼 1, 𝐼 ̃2) w as  fed to GS reconstruction, yielding  the object  phase  reconstruction  presented in Fig.  2(e) . For comparison ,

we also evaluated the GS result (Fig. 2(f)) obtained for the standard input: ( 𝐼 1, 𝐼 2), and i ncluded the  conventional  twin -image corrupted  Gabor 

reconstruction (Fig. 2(d))  that was  obtained by AS backpropagation of hologram  𝐼 1 to the sample plane. Figure  2. Simulation test of YOSO . In -line holograms : physically captured  data  (a)  𝐼 1, and  (b)  𝐼 2, and  (c)  the  DNN -estimate  of the latter ; the phase   

> reconstructions obtained with (d) Gabor method, (e) YOSO, (f) GS using physically captured data, (g) ground truth object phase.

Comparing  Figs . 2(b) and 2(c)  show  that the DNN is able to mimic diffraction between planes  𝑧 1 and  𝑧 2, although some discrepancies 

remain, primarily in the high spatial frequency r ange . The quality metrics —root mean square error (RMSE) and structural similarity index 

measure (SSIM) —between  𝐼 ̃2 and  𝐼 2 are RMSE  = 0.037 , SSIM  = 0.624 . The final phase reconstruction obtained with YOSO  (Fig. 2(e) )

demonstrates effective suppression of twin -image  artefacts , which are  visible in  Fig.  2(d)  as a conjugate d,  defocused copy of the object that 

spatially overlaps with the correct reconstruction,  thereby impairing the recovery of slowly varying phase variations and introducing high -

frequency artefacts . These  effect s are  minimized  in the YOSO result, which  appear s similar to the  standard  GS result  (Fig. 2(f)) . This  is 

supported  by  image quality  metrics  comparing the  results in Figs. 2 (e)  and 2(f) : RMSE =  0.022 rad  and SSIM =  0.529. 

3.2 Experimental  study 

YOSO was evaluated using a series of experimental measurements, beginning with a  custom  phase test target manufactured by  Lyncée 

Tec. The  sample  was fabricated by etching a 125±5 nm  deep structure  in Borofloat 33 glass, which  in our  experiment  corresponds to a phase 

delay of 0.66 rad.  The  measurement  parameters ( 𝑧 1, 𝑧 2, Δ, λ)  were identical to those  described in the previous section.  The data was captured 

using  a lensless DIHM  setup  [25] .

The results of YOSO evaluation are presented in Fig. 3.  The e xperimentally captured holograms  𝐼 1, 𝐼 2 are  displayed  in Fig s.  3(a)  and 3 (b), 

respectively. The  DNN -infer red  hologram  𝐼 ̃2 (Fig. 3(c) ) shows good  agreement with  the  experimentally captured  data  𝐼 2. During inference ,

we used  the same  trained model that  was  applied  in the simulation test (Fig. 2) . The phase reconstructions obtained using the Gabor, YOSO, 

and GS methods are shown in Fig s. 3(d) –(f), respectively. Figure 3(g) presents cross -sections of the phase profiles along the red dotted lines 

in Fig. 3(d) –(f), together with reference lines indicating the expected bounds of the total  object  phase delay. 

Comparing Figs. 3(d) and 3(e)  shows that  YOSO effectively suppresse d the twin -image  effect , enabling improved recovery of low spatial 

frequencies, a common challenge in DIHM.  Based on the proximity of the YOSO total phase delay to the ground -truth value of 0.66 radians 

(Fig. 3(g)) , it can be argued that YOSO  outperformed  the standard GS method operating on experimentally captured data.  A likely  explanation 

for  this unexpected observation is YOSO’s  independence  from  misalignment errors  [43] , including  critical  error  in  the  𝑧 1 − 𝑧 2 distance 

estimati on , which  in  the  standard  GS  approach  is  done via  an  autofocusing procedure  [12] .

It is worth noting that the YOSO reconstruction shows reduced fidelity compared with the  standard  GS reconstruction in regions  of  dust 

particle s (violet arrow in Fig. 3(e)). This occurs because,  while  constructing  the  training  dataset , we assumed primarily phase  character of the 

sample , allowing only subtle amplitude modulation. More precisely,  the object’s amplitude and phase are  modelled  as separate distributions, 

with independently controlled modulation s. Because the measured object was expected to be purely phase, we limited the amplitude 

modulation to a narrow range of  ±15% of the background value . This enabled accurate restoration of the  pure -phase  test bars  but hindered 

the reconstruction of dust particles, which introduce strong amplitude variations. If the dust particles were the primary mea surement target, 

the training dataset should be  modified to account for more absorptive samples. To demonstrate this effect, we trained an additional model 

assuming stronger absorption ( ±30%  amplitude modulation). A snippet of the YOSO reconstruction obtained with this  new  model is shown 

in Fig.  3(e1). Figure  3. Experimental results for the phase resolution test target. The  physically captured  holograms: (a)  𝐼 1, (b)  𝐼 2, and (c) DNN -based  estimate  𝐼 ̃2 of the             

> latter .Phase reconstruction sobtained using (d) Gabor method, (e) YOSO, (f) standard GS with physically captured holograms. Insert (e1) shows the YOSO
> reconstruction obtained with a DNN model trained on data corresponding to more absorptive sample (±30% amplitude modulation in contrast to ±15% in
> panel (e)) .Panel (g) presents cross -sections through the central slice of the phase reconstruction smarked in (d) -(f) with red dashed lines; the horizontal red
> dashed lines in (g) denote the excepted level of phase delay.

Next, we applied YOSO  to the  analysis  of  cheek  cell  holograms  captured  using  a lensless  DIHM  system  [25]  with the following 

parameters:  𝑧 1=1 1.51 mm,  𝑧 2=13.97 mm,  Δ =2.4 μm, λ=0.532 μm.  Human cheek cells were collected by gently scraping the inner side of 

the cheek, then transferred into a droplet of PBS on a microscope slide , and covered with a coverslip . Using  this sample, we demonstrate two 

key  capabilities  of YOSO: the  scal ability  feature  of  the  ResNet  model  (Fig. 4(a) –(b3)) and  physics -consistent  extrapolation (Fig. 4(c) –(e)). 

Multi -scale  ResNet, which serves as the backbone of YOSO, is a fully convolutional architecture and th erefore  supports  variable -sized 

input. This feature allows  the  use  of  small images (256 × 256) during training to reduce computational requirements, while  conveniently 

enabling inference on  arbitrary -sized and  much larger images . This  contrasts with  the  widely used  U-Net , whose s kip connections  imposes 

spatial alignment constraints , restrict ing  it to  a fixed input size s and , in practise , requiring  a patch -and -sti tch  processin g.

The scalability of the YOSO network is illustrated in Fig. 4(a) , which shows hologram  𝐼 1 with  a size of  2048 × 2048 , containing  a red 

rectangle denot ing  a 256 × 256  region  that matches the image size used during training. Both the full -size hologram and the cropped 256 × 

256  hologram  were processed with the same trained model,  yielding  two size -varied estimates of  𝐼 2. Central areas  (cyan dotted rectangle  in 

Fig. 4(a) ) of these results  are shown in Fig. 4(b1) and Fig. 4(b2), respectively . T he results are also compared with the experimentally measured 

intensity  𝐼 2 (Fig.  4(b3) ). The DNN -estimated distributions (Fig. 4(b1) and Fig. 4(b2)) are nearly identical (RMSE = 0.004, SSIM = 0.9997), 

demonstrating the possibility of efficient training on small -sized images followed by inference on large inputs. This scalability feature of the 

YOSO  architecture is further investigated in the Supplementary Information, where we show that processing full -size holograms yields both 

improved accuracy and reduced computational cost compared to the patch -and -stitch approach. 

Another interesting feature of YOSO is  the ability to produce  diffraction -aware  hologram extrapolation. Hologram padding is used to 

address boundary artifacts stemming from the fast Fourier transform during  AS  propagation in the GS algorithm.  Classically , holograms are 

padded  with zero or  edge values , the latter case being shown  in  Fig. 4(c) and Fig. 4(d)  (padded  51 2 × 51 2 region of interests marked in Fig. 

4(a) with  a blue rectangle ). Padding mitigate s the  border  problems; however, it is  physically inconsistent , i.e.  diffraction of the padded region 

of  𝐼 1 does not matc h the  padd ed area of  𝐼 2, and vice versa , which contradicts the underlying principle of the GS algorithm.  In contrast, when 

the padded  𝐼 1 (Fig. 4(c)) is  inputted  to YOSO, the  DNN  generates  𝐼 ̃2 with diffraction -aware  extrapolation  (Fig. 4(e)), which is  physically 

consistent with  𝐼 1 also in  the padd ed  area . This can be observed by comparing the snippets in Fig. 4( d) and Fig. 4(e),  which  demonstrate  that 

YOSO can generate  Gabor fringes  that  extend into the padding  region. 

The data  from  Fig. 4(c) and Fig. 4(e) were used for  the  object wave retrieval with  YOSO , yielding  amplitude  and phase  results shown  in 

Fig s. 4(h ) and  4(k) , respectively . The results demonstrate excellent twin -image removal  compare d to the Gabor  results  (Fig s. 4(f),  4(i) ), and 

are  consistent  with the  results of  the  standard GS using physically acquired data  (Fig s. 4(g),  4(j)). Figure 4.  Experimental results for the human che ek cells sample.  Scal ability  test: (a) full field of view (2048 × 2048) of the in -line hologram  𝐼 1 with  central                       

> 256 × 256 region marked with a red solid -line rectangle . Both the full -sized and cropped holograms were input to the DNN ,yielding two results ,which
> central 100 × 100 regions ((b1) and (b2) ,respectively )show perfect agreement . T he results are compared with experimentally captured ground truth in (b3).
> Diffraction -aware padding test: padded in -line holograms (c) 𝐼 1, and (d) 𝐼 2, and its DNN -inferred estimate 𝐼 ̃2; the shipset present simproved physics -
> consistent padding produced by YOSO. Amplitude and phase reconstructions obtained with :(f), (i) Gabor method, (g), (j) YOSO, (h), (k) GS with physically
> captured pair of holograms.

Next sample is  a mouse  brain slic e (sample preparation described in  Sec.  6.5 ). The  sample was measured using  the  lensless microscopy 

system with following parameters : 𝑧 1 = 1.86 mm,  𝑧 2 = 5.16 mm,  Δ= 2.4 μm, λ  = 0.405 μm.  The presented measurement case demonstrates 

key advantages of lensless imaging —namely, a large field of view (here 8 × 10.5 mm) and the ability to image at challenging wavelengths, 

such as the near -UV (here λ  = 0.405 μm). 

The brain slice is  expected  to produce  non -negligible  amplitude  variations;  therefore , the  training data  were generated  assuming object 

amplitude modulation of ±50%.  It is important to emphasize that the mouse brain slice  is a challenging sample , with characteristics markedly 

different from the preceding objects —it is thick and non -sparse. Despite this, the YOSO training data generation methodology enable d

successful generalization to this case.  Due to  more challenging sample  character  and thus  lower data quality, 10 GS iterations were used for 

both YOSO and the standard GS with physically captured data. 

The result of YOSO reconstruction is presented in Fig. 5(a) using amplitude contrast. The image shows a coronal section throu gh the 

mouse brain with clear delineation of anatomical structures: the cerebral cortex (A), hippocampus (B), thalamus (C),  lateral ventricle  (D), 

caudate putamen  (E), amygdala (F),  and  hypothalamus ( G). Regions rich in myelin, such as the corpus callosum ( H), are particularly well 

highlighted.  The hippocampal region (B), with clearly visible  dentate gyrus ( DG ), CA1  and  CA3  structures , is further  analysed  in Figs. 5(b) –

5(j).  The obtained image quality in Fig. 5(f, i ) can potentially facilitate biological analysis, such as precise quantification of cell layer 

thickness, offering a valuable tool for measuring granule cell dispersion (GCD)  [52,53]  in animal models of epilepsy.  It  can be observed that 

the DNN -inferred hologram  𝐼 ̃2 (Fig.  5(d))  is in good agreement with the physically captured hologram  𝐼 2 (Fig.  5(c)).  Thus,  YOSO yield s

amplitude and phase  reconstruction s (Figs. 5(f),  5(i))  similar to th ose  obtained with the  conventional GS method  (Figs. 5(g),  5(j)) . Crucially, like GS, and unlike Gabor  method , YOSO separate s phase information from amplitude variations (see the circular zoomed areas in Figs. 5(e) -

5(j)).                                

> Figure 5.Measurement results of a coronal section of a mouse brain slice: (a) YOSO’s amplitude with clearly visible cerebral cortex (A), hippocampus (B),
> thalamus (C), lateral ventricle (D), caudate putamen (E), amygdala (F), hypothalamus ( G), and corpus callosum (H) ; (b -j) zoomed views of the hippocampal
> region for : (b) the first hologram 𝐼 1, (c) second hologram 𝐼 2,and (d) its DNN -estimate 𝐼 ̃2(d); amplitude (e -g) and phase (h -j) part sof hologram
> reconstruction obtained using Gabor (e, h), YOSO (f, i) ,and the standard GS method with physically acquired data (g ,j) ; crop of YOSO’s amplitude
> reconstruction in panel (f) shows the dentate gyrus (DG) and CA1 and CA3 regions .

Lasty, we present possibility of application of YOSO for lens -based  DIHM  systems, where a microscope setup is used to provide optical 

magnification and the phase encoding is performed via defocusing using DIHM principle.  The measurement example is a  high -speed (90 fps) 

time -lapse imaging of human spermatozoa, where the dynamic nature of the sample highlights the importance of single -frame phase retrieval. 

A human sperm sample from an anonymous donor was transported under refrigeration and used without filtration or preprocessing . A 1 mL 

portion was warmed to body temperature and placed directly into a counting chamber, containing both sperm cells and additiona l seminal 

particles. The parameters of the  applied  lens -based DIHM  setup  [23]  are as follows:  𝑧 1 = 70  μm,  𝑧 2= 101  μm,  Δ= 5.5  μm, λ  = 0. 635  μm.  The 

system applies a  conventional  upright microscope  configuration  with  20 ×, 0.46  NA .Figure  6 shows (a) the input hologram  𝐼 1 along with  (b) the Gabor and (c) YOSO phase reconstructions for the first frame  of the  data 

series . Visualization 1  presents  the corresponding YOSO reconstruction for  all  acquired frames.  The presented results show successful twin -

image suppression.  The  analysed  cells are suspended and therefore constitute a 3D sample. Notably, YOSO is fully compatible with 3D 

objects, as it does not assume a single object plane, either during DNN inference or during the GS step, both of which are pe rformed in 

defocused planes. C onsequently, YOSO can accurately recover not only the in -focus  sample features  at the  𝑧 0 plane  but also correctly retrieve 

its  out -of -focus region s.  This is a crucial as it allows for further holographic  post processing, mostly importantly numerical refocusing . The 

described aspect  is illustrated  by  zoom ed regions  A-C of the YOSO phase  𝜑 0 in  Fig.  6(c), which show  both focused (A) and  out -of -focus  (B, 

C)  sperm cells, along  with  their appearance after numerical propagation to the in -focus plane s (refocusing is performed  manually using  AS 

propagation  on the  full -field  YOSO  object wave reconstruction ). The same effect is  further  demonstrated with  Visualization 2, which presents 

the phase distribution obtained  by  numerical ly  refocusing the  initial  YOSO result  (Fig.  6(c))  over propagation  distances from −4 to 9 μm .    

> Figure 6.Measurement results of the sperm sample: input hologram (a), phase reconstruction obtained using the Gabor (b) and YOSO (c) m ethods. Zoomed
> area A shows an in -focus sperm cell, while zoomed areas B and C show out -of -focus cells along with their focused ver sions (the focusing was performed
> with the AS propagation method using full view of the YOSO object wave reconstruction ).

4. Discussion 

The proposed YOSO framework addresses analytical ill -posedness of  the  single -frame phase retrieval in DIHM by numerically generating 

second multi -height holographic frame. In this way YOSO enables single -frame phase imaging while maintaining compatibility with popular 

and reliable GS phase demodulation method. The fact that  DNN is used just for data augmentation instead of delivering final phase results 

limits the impact of potential hallucinations and enhances confidence in the method. The chosen way of th e phase retrieval problem 

formulation has an advantage of real intensity image to real intensity image regression, thus bypassing the challenge of comp lex information 

coding. 

Importantly, the inferred hologram is free of alignment errors allowing to omit demanding step of data correction and autofoc using. 

Notably, all the experimental multi -height datasets  (𝐼 1, 𝐼 2) presented in this work underwent this procedure (autofocusing to determine the 

distance between the recording planes, geometric transforms to correct for changes in magnification and misalignments  [25] ).  Moreover, as 

demonstrated with the cheek cell measurements, YOSO generates diffraction -aware padding of the inferred hologram. Thanks to this feature, 

𝐼 1 and  𝐼 ̃2 are physically consistent also in the padding regions, which  aligns with the  GS  procedure .

The chosen architecture, i.e. multi -scale ResNet, allows for efficient training lasting 27 min on high -performance workstation and 75 min 

on mid -range computer  (details in Sec. 6.3) , which is of great practical importance . The possibility of achieving fast training is due to several 

factors: the convenient formulation of the inverse problem as a single real -image to single real -image regression, the efficiency of the multi -

scale ResNet architecture, and the ability to train  on small images while performing  predictions on larger inputs.  The ability of YOSO to 

process large holograms in a single forward pass eliminates the need for patch -based processing and subsequent stitching, which introduce 

computational overhead and can lead to inter -patch inconsistencies.  Moreover, full -field processing is particularly advantageous in DIHM, 

where defocus -induced beam expansion occurs. In such conditions, reducing the computational window effectively decreases the system’s 

numerical aperture  [54]  and may result in the loss of high -spatial -frequency information. 

Another important advantage of YOSO is its reliance on computer -generated training data derived from natural images (here, images of 

flowers  [55] ), which enables excellent generalization. This is demonstrated via cross -platform testing on diverse samples: a  phase  resolution 

test target with sharp edges, sparse and smooth cells, and a non -sparse mouse brain slice. Good generalization is supported by the fact that, due to the chosen problem formulation, the DNN is forced to learn to perform diffraction over the  𝑧 2-𝑧 1 distance rather than memorizing 

object features. At the same time, although humans perceive flower images as a uniform category, they exhibit substantial mor phological 

diversity and therefore do not impose bias towards specific sample types. 

In this paper we validate YOSO on diversified samples as well with different systems  – different configurations of lensless DIHM setup 

and a lens -based DIHM realization. In all the investigated cases YOSO enabled successful twin image suppression and impro ved recovery 

of slowly varying phase changes, which is widely acknowledged challenge in in -line holography [16,22]. The test with resolution test target 

shows that YOSO  can provide  quantitative results, although impaired recovery of low spatial frequencies  makes DIHM limited in this scope. 

Importantly, the tests with mouse brain slice and the human spermatozoa sample, experimentally demonstrated the YOSO’s applic ability to 

thick objects. The test with numerical refocusing of YOSO results performed on sperm  cells demonstrated the possibility of holographic 

postprocessing of YOSO reconstructions, including potentially  4D tracking  [12]  and holographic tomography  [13] .

The main remaining challenge of YOSO is the limited transfer of high spatial frequencies to the DNN -inferred hologram, which could 

potentially be improved through cost -function  engineering  and architectural enhancements. Additionally, YOSO requires running the iterative 

GS algorithm, resulting in longer computational times compared to deep -learning approaches that perform direct hologram -to -phase inference 

[41] .

5. Conclusions 

YOSO is a single -frame phase retrieval framework for DIHM in which supervised deep learning is used to numerically generate an 

additional more defocused diffraction pattern, creating a so -called multi -height holographic dataset, which is then processed wit h well -

established GS algorithm. The proposed framework enables efficient twin image suppression and enhances low spatial frequency  transfer. 

Application of DNN for data augmentation rather than direct phase retrieval limits the impact of potential halluci nations and enhances 

confidence in the method. YOSO applies training on computer generated data derived from natural images, which enables excelle nt 

generalization. The chosen model architecture, multi -scale ResNet with modified residual block structure, a llows for fast training  (27 min .). 

Moreover, t he applied DNN model can process inputs of varying sizes, avoiding patch -and -stitch processing, which improves both 

computational efficiency and reconstruction accuracy. A further advantage of YOSO is physics -consistent  hologram  padding, which aligns 

with the Gerchberg –Saxton procedure.  Lastly,  YOSO enables  measurement of  thick samples and allows further holographic processing of 

the retrieved optical field, including numerical focusing. 

The YOSO framework was validated through simulation and experimental tests on various systems (lens -based and lensless DIHM) and 

across diverse samples, including a resolution test target, adherent human cheek cells, suspended human sperm cells, and mous e brain  slice .

The results of this work are publicly available as software enabling end -to -end implementation. 

6. Methods 

6.1.  Training d ata generation 

The training dataset  wa s generated using numerical simulation applying  the  AS propagation  (Sec.  6.4) , with natural images used as  a basis 

for constructing object fields at  𝑧 0 = 0. A publicly available dataset  [55]  from Kaggle containing  above  4000  flower images was used as the 

source data.  The Kaggle dataset contains images of varying sizes , thus  the images were  first  re sampled  to  256  × 256  px. Two different images 

were randomly selected from the dataset to represent amplitude and phase distributions of the object  wave . The phase image s were  pre -

processed  using  mild  Gaussian high -pass filtering  (standard deviation of the Gaussian kernel  = 85  px)  to  supress  slowly varying  components 

that cause d border  artifacts  during  the  AS propagation.  For  each  𝑚 -th field,  the  amplitude and phase distributions were  rescaled to  assumed 

ranges: [1 − 𝑟 𝐴  

> 𝑚
> 2

, 1+ 𝑟 𝐴  

> 𝑚
> 2

] for amplitude , and [ − 𝑟 𝜑  

> 𝑚
> 2

, + 𝑟 𝜑  

> 𝑚
> 2

] for phase . The range -controlling values  𝑟 𝐴 

> 𝑚

, 𝑟 𝜑  

> 𝑚

for the  𝑚 -th object wave were 

randomly selected  based on  the respective  maximum values  𝑟 𝐴  and  𝑟 𝜑 . Typically, for  predominantly phase object s,  we set  𝑟 𝐴  = 0.3 (or ±15% 

amplitude variation)  and  𝑟 𝜑 =2𝜋 .

To reduce diffraction artifacts caused by image boundaries, the images were padded to  512  × 512  pixels  using border pixel replication. 

The optical field was then propagated using  the  AS method for  𝑧 1 and  𝑧 2 distances  and subsequently cropped back to the original size . The 

resulting dataset consist ed  of  two components : intensity frames  𝐼 1 at distance  𝑧 1 used as  the  network inputs , and the  intensity frames  𝐼 2 at 

distance  𝑧 2 used as  the  training targets .

6.2 Network architecture 

The proposed network architecture builds upon residual learning principles but extends the classical ResNet design by introdu cing a multi -

path, multi -scale processing scheme  [45,46,41] . Instead of a single sequential backbone, as in the classical ResNet , the network is composed 

of several parallel branches operating at different spatial resolutions, obtained through progressively stronger downsampling  of the input data 

(see Fig. 7(a)).  Another  modification  in YOSO approach , with  respect  to classical ResNet, is  connection structure in residual block (see Fig. 

7(b)).  The modified residual block incorporates additional connections, enabling improved feature reuse and gradient flow  in a way inspired 

by  DenseNet  [56] , while  maintaining a balance between accuracy and computational cost .

Each  network  branch can be interpreted as a residual processing stream that extracts features at a specific scale. The use of multiple 

resolutions enables the network to capture both fine and coarse structures of the analyzed data, increasing its representatio nal capac ity while maintaining computational efficiency  (see  Supplement ary document,  Tab . S1) . The outputs of all branches are subsequently fused to form 

the final prediction. The complexity of the network is primarily controlled by two parameters: (1) the number of parallel pro cessing paths 

with different downsampling factors, and (2) the number  of filters in the convolutional layers within each branch. The final architecture used 

for YOSO  is obtained by tuning these parameters  to 4 branches and 32 convolutional filters . The  hyperparameter tuning  process is  described 

in  Supplementary  Information .

Multi -scale ResNet , used here as a backbone of  YOSO , resembles a popular U -Net in terms of changing the dimensionality of the image 

to recover its various scale components. However,  the  U-Net  architecture implicitly  imposes  constraints on the input size due to the sequence 

of downsampling and upsampling operations combined with skip connections, which require  fixed  feature map dimensions across 

corresponding levels. As a result, the network typically operates correctly only for input sizes compatible with the predefin ed scaling factors 

used during training.  In contrast, the propos ed architecture  (Fig.  7) does not impose such constraints. Although the spatial resolution may 

vary across different branches, each processing path consists of locally defined, dimension -preserving operations (e.g., same -padded 

convolutions), and the merging of features does not r ely on strict size matching between encoder and decoder stages.  This makes the network 

inherently scalable, allowing it to be trained on small images and directly applied to inputs of arbitrary size during infere nce.  The scalabilit y

issue of the YOSO model is further investigated in Supplementary Information.     

> Figure 7.Network architecture :(a) scheme of the layers and (b) modified residual block .

6.3 Training description and timing 

The dataset consisted of 4000 input –target  pairs, which were split into training, validation, and test sets in an 8:1:1 ratio.  The training was 

performed  in Python  using TensorFlow 2 framework . The weights were initialized with Glorot uniform initialization method and the n updated 

using the Adam optimizer with default parameters (β₁ = 0.9, β₂ = 0.999, ε = 1 × 10⁻⁷)  and  an exponential decay schedule  (an initial learning 

rate of 5 × 10⁻², decay steps of 10,000, and a decay rate of 0.9 ). The cost function was  mean squared error (MSE) . Training was performed 

for 25 epochs with a batch size of  2.  The best model checkpoint was selected based on the lowest validation loss.  The final evaluation on the 

test dataset is described in the Supplementary Information. 

The training took approximately 27 minutes on a high -performance computing system with the following specifications: Ubuntu 24.04.3 

LTS (Noble Numbat), Intel Core i9 -14900KS, 192 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX 5000 Ada Generation GPU (32 GB VRAM). This 

represen ts a substantial acceleration compared to the reported 18 -hour training time of a  related  U-Net -based model proposed in  [43] . Since 

the latter timing was obtained on a still high -end but more standard system (Intel Xeon Gold 6230R CPU @ 2.10 GHz, NVIDIA Quadro RTX 5000 16 GB  [43] ), we  ran the training  of our model  on a mid -range workstation (NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4060 Mobile GPU with 8 GB 

VRAM; AMD Ryzen 7 7840HS CPU with 16 GB RAM, running Windows 11 with training executed under WSL Ubuntu 24.04.3), which 

resulted in a training time of 7 5 minutes.  Additionally, we performed training on a cloud platform, specifically Google Colab using the free 

access version with a GPU T4 (NVIDIA Tesla T4 with 16 GB VRAM), which yielded an approximate training time of  140 minutes . These 

results illus trate that  the efficient multi -scale ResNet architecture applied in this work enables reasonably fast training even on moderately 

powerful hardware .

6.4 Gerchberg -Saxton algorithm 

The YOSO  framework involves  the phase retrieval with well -established and robust error -reduction  method , i.e. , GS algorithm.  In the 

implemented  GS  approach, the optical field  𝑢  = 𝐴 𝑒 𝑖𝜑  is iteratively propagated  between  the planes  𝑧 1 and  𝑧 2 using numerical  free -space 

diffraction  with AS algorithm  [50] . The AS propagation consists of three steps: 

(i)  computation of  fast Fourier transform of  𝑢 (𝑥 , 𝑦 ), yielding  its  spectral representation  𝑢 ̃ (𝑓 𝑥 , 𝑓 𝑦 ), where  (𝑓 𝑥 , 𝑓 𝑦  ) denote s spatial 

frequencies; 

(ii)  multiplication  of wave spectrum  𝑢 ̃ by  the free -space propagation transfer function  𝐻 :

𝐻 (𝑓 𝑥 , 𝑓 𝑦 ) = {𝑒𝑥𝑝  (𝑖𝑘 Δ𝑧 √𝑛 0 

> 2

− 𝑓 𝑥 2 − 𝑓 𝑦 2) 𝑖𝑓  (𝑘 𝑛 0)2 > 𝑓 𝑥 2 + 𝑓 𝑦 2,

0 𝑜𝑡 ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒 ;

(1) 

(iii)  computation of  inverse fast Fourier transform of the product  𝑢 ̃ ∙ 𝐻  to obtain the spatial representation of the  propagated  field. 

In Eq. (1) , 𝑘  = 2𝜋  

> 𝜆

denotes  the wave vector,  Δ𝑧  is  the propagation distance,  and  𝑛 0 is the refractive index of the  propagation  medium (here 

for air  𝑛 0 = 1).

In GS, a t each plane , the object wave  amplitude  𝐴  is replaced with the  measured  amplitude  distribution , i.e.,  √𝐼 𝑗  for  the plane  𝑧 𝑗  , where 

𝑗  = 1, 2 . In YOSO, the GS phase retrieval is performed using DNN -augmented multi -height dataset thus we apply the measured  data  √𝐼 1, for 

𝑧 1 plane and the corresponding  DNN -estimated distribution  √𝐼 2̃ for  𝑧 2 plane. The steps continue for predefined  number of iterations , usually 

𝑖 𝑚𝑎𝑥  ∈ (10 , 25 ). The iteration  number  𝑖 𝑚𝑎𝑥  predominantly depends on data quality  [25] . While a larger number of iterations can improve 

results for high -quality simulated data, for experimental data affected by coherent noise and artifacts, additional iterations often do not re sult 

in further improvement of the reconstruction.  In this work, if not stated differently, we applied  𝑖 𝑚𝑎𝑥  = 25 .

The GS iterations allow to estimate phase distributions at the plane  𝑧 1, which is then  combined with the physically captured amplitude 

(√𝐼 1) and, finally, the optical field at the object plane is evaluated via AS  propagation at the distance  −𝑧 1.

6.5 Brain tissue preparation 

Adult mouse was  transcardially perfused with phosphate -buffered saline (PBS). Brain w as  rapidly removed from the skull, the cerebellum 

was separated, and the hemispheres were briefly rinsed in ice -cold PBS. Tissue was then immersion -fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) 

for 24 hours at 4°C. Following fixation, brain w as  cryoprotected by sequential immersion in 15% sucrose in PBS for 24 hours, then 30% 

sucrose overnight, both at 4°C. Brain w as  embedded in OCT compound (Leica, cat. no. 14020108926) and sectioned  coronally at 30 μm 

using a cryostat (Thermo Fisher) at −21°C. Sections were stored in cryoprotective medium at −20°C until imaged.  For imaging , the brain 

section w as  mounted on a glass slide and covered with a coverslip using  clearing -enhanced 3D Tissue Clearing Solution  (Ce3D ™).

All procedures involving animals were approved by the Local Ethical Committee for Animal Experiments in Bydgoszcz, Poland, in 

accordance with national and international guidelines for animal care and use in research. Male C57BL/6  mouse  (6 –9 weeks old) w as  housed 

under standard conditions (20 –23°C, 55 –60% humidity, 12 -hour light/dark cycle, 15 air exchanges/hour) in a pathogen -free facility. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Science Centre Poland (OPUS 2024/55/B/ST7/02085; SONATA 2022/47/D/NZ3/02613), the 

National Centre for Research and Development, Poland (LIDER14/0329/2023), and the Foundation for Polish Science under the Eur opean 

Fun ds for Smart Economy project BRAINCITY (FENG.02.01 -IP.05 -0010/24), co -financed by the European Union. V. Micó  and  J. Á. Picazo -

Bueno acknowledge support from Grant PID2023 -153363NB -C21 from MCIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033, funded by the Spanish 

Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Universidades .

Data and code availability 

The in -line holograms and trained models used in this study will be available at  [49] , and will be made publicly available upon publication. 

Software  availability 

The YOSO software will be hosted in a GitHub repository  [48] , and will become publicly available upon publication. Conflict of interest 

> The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Authors  contributions               

> JW: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing –original draft, Visualization, Validation, Investigation.
> AW: Software, Validation, Investigation, Data curation, Writing –original draft.
> WO: Software, Investigation, Writing –original draft, Visualization.
> WF: Investigation.
> PA: Investigation , Data curation.
> MR: Investigation , Data curation , Formal Analysis .
> AR: Resources.
> MS: Resources, Writing –original draft.
> JAPB: Resources, Data curation.
> VM: Resources.
> MT: Resources, Writing –review & editing, Project administration , Funding acquisition.
> MC: Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Writing –original draft.

References 

[1]  Park Y, Depeursinge C and Popescu G 2018 Quantitative phase imaging in biomedicine  Nat. Photonics  12 

578 –89 

[2]  Zheng G, Horstmeyer R and Yang C 2013 Wide -field, high -resolution Fourier ptychographic microscopy  Nat. 

Photonics  7 739 –45 

[3]  Zuo C, Li J, Sun J, Fan Y, Zhang J, Lu L, Zhang R, Wang B, Huang L and Chen Q 2020 Transport of intensity 

equation: a tutorial  Opt. Lasers Eng.  135  106187 

[4]  Tian L and Waller L 2015 Quantitative differential phase contrast imaging in an LED array microscope  Opt. 

Express  23  11394 –403 

[5]  Baek Y, Lee K, Shin S and Park Y 2019 Kramers –Kronig holographic imaging for high -space -bandwidth 

product  Optica  6 45 –51 

[6]  de Groot P 2011 Phase Shifting Interferometry  Optical Measurement of Surface Topography  ed R Leach 

(Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer) pp 167 –86 

[7]  Kujawinska M and Wójciak J 1991 High accuracy Fourier transform fringe pattern analysis  Opt. Lasers Eng. 

14  325 –39 

[8]  Garcia -Sucerquia J, Xu W, Jericho S K, Klages P, Jericho M H and Kreuzer H J 2006 Digital in -line holographic 

microscopy  Appl. Opt.  45  836 –50 

[9]  Ozcan A and McLeod E 2016 Lensless Imaging and Sensing  Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng.  18  77 –102 

[10]  Wu Y and Ozcan A 2018 Lensless digital holographic microscopy and its applications in biomedicine and 

environmental monitoring  Methods  136  4–16 

[11]  Greenbaum A, Luo W, Su T -W, Göröcs Z, Xue L, Isikman S O, Coskun A F, Mudanyali O and Ozcan A 2012 

Imaging without lenses: achievements and remaining challenges of wide -field on -chip microscopy  Nat. 

Methods  9 889 –95 [12]  Rogalski M, Picazo -Bueno J A, Winnik J, Zdańkowski P, Micó V and Trusiak M 2022 Accurate automatic 

object 4D tracking in digital in -line holographic microscopy based on computationally rendered dark fields 

Sci. Rep.  12  12909 

[13]  Rogalski M, Winnik J, Dudek J, Arcab P, Wdowiak E, Matryba P, Stefaniuk M, Zdankowski P and Trusiak M 

2026 Gigavoxel -Scale Multiple -Scattering -Aware Lensless Holotomography  Light Sci. Appl.  (accepted) 

[14]  Illumicell AI. https://www.illumicell.ai 

[15]  Holmarc’s DIHM. https://www.holmarc.com/dihm1.php 

[16]  Vila -Andrés R, Martínez -Espert A, Furlan W D, Esteve -Taboada J J and Micó V 2025 Non -contact lensless 

holographic reconstruction of diffractive intraocular lenses profiles  Sci. Rep.  15  566 

[17]  Cai Y and Wang F 2007 Lensless imaging with partially coherent light  Opt. Lett.  32  205 –7

[18]  Wdowiak E, Arcab P, Rogalski M, Chwastowicz A, Matryba P, Lenarcik M, Winnik J, Zdankowski P and 

Trusiak M 2026 Near -infrared lensless holographic microscopy on a visible sensor enables label -free high -

throughput imaging in strong scattering  arXiv.org 

[19]  Eisebitt S, Lüning J, Schlotter W F, Lörgen M, Hellwig O, Eberhardt W and Stöhr J 2004 Lensless imaging of 

magnetic nanostructures by X -ray spectro -holography  Nature  432  885 –8

[20]  Jin X, Zhao J, Wang D, Healy J J, Rong L, Wang Y and Lin S 2023 Continuous -wave terahertz in -line 

holographic diffraction tomography with the scattering fields reconstructed by a physics -enhanced deep 

neural network  Photonics Res.  11  2149 –58 

[21]  Gabor D 1948 A New Microscopic Principle  Nature  161  777 –8

[22]  Gao Y and Cao L 2023 Iterative projection meets sparsity regularization: towards practical single -shot 

quantitative phase imaging with in -line holography  Light Adv. Manuf.  4 6

[23]  Rogalski M, Arcab P, Wdowiak E, Picazo -Bueno J Á, Micó V, Józwik M and Trusiak M 2025 Hybrid Iterating -

Averaging Low Photon Budget Gabor Holographic Microscopy  ACS Photonics  12  1771 –82 

[24]  Greenbaum A and Ozcan A 2012 Maskless imaging of dense samples using pixel super -resolution based 

multi -height lensfree on -chip microscopy  Opt. Express  20  3129 –43 

[25]  Winnik J, Suski D, Arcab P, Rogalski M and Trusiak M 2024 Phase retrieval via conjugate gradient 

minimization in double -plane lensless holographic microscopy  Opt. Express  32  28666 –80 

[26]  Zhu H, Liu Z, Zhou Y, Ma Z and Cao X 2022 DNF: diffractive neural field for lensless microscopic imaging  Opt. 

Express  30  18168 –78 

[27]  Huang L, Chen H, Liu T and Ozcan A 2023 Self -supervised learning of hologram reconstruction using physics 

consistency  Nat. Mach. Intell.  5 895 –907 

[28]  Zuo C, Sun J, Zhang J, Hu Y and Chen Q 2015 Lensless phase microscopy and diffraction tomography with 

multi -angle and multi -wavelength illuminations using a LED matrix  Opt. Express  23  14314 –28 [29]  Bai C, Peng T, Min J, Li R, Zhou Y and Yao B 2021 Dual -wavelength in -line digital holography with untrained 

deep neural networks  Photonics Res.  9 2501 –10 

[30]  Gerchberg R 1972 A practical algorithm for the determination of phase from image and diffraction plane 

pictures  Optik  35  237 –46 

[31]  Li H, Chen X, Chi Z, Mann C and Razi A 2020 Deep DIH: Single -Shot Digital In -Line Holography Reconstruction 

by Deep Learning  IEEE Access  8 202648 –59 

[32]  Galande A S, Thapa V, Gurram H P R and John R 2023 Untrained deep network powered with explicit 

denoiser for phase recovery in inline holography  Appl. Phys. Lett.  122  133701 

[33]  Galande A S, Thapa V, Vijay A and John R 2024 High -resolution lensless holographic microscopy using a 

physics -aware deep network  J. Biomed. Opt.  29  106502 

[34]  Tian X, Li R, Peng T, Xue Y, Min J, Li X, Bai C and Yao B 2024 Multi -prior physics -enhanced neural network 

enables pixel super -resolution and twin -image -free phase retrieval from single -shot hologram  Opto -

Electron. Adv.  7 240060 –17 

[35]  Feng Y, Xu J, Jiao J, Zhong L, Lu X and Tian J 2023 Untrained network regularized by total variation in single -

shot lensless holography  Results Phys.  55  107174 

[36]  Chen X, Wang H, Razi A, Kozicki M and Mann C 2023 DH -GAN: a physics -driven untrained generative 

adversarial network for holographic imaging  Opt. Express  31  10114 –35 

[37]  Bai Z, Liu X, Guo C, Jiang J and Ji X 2026 Untrained physics -enhanced fully complex transformer for single -

frame hologram reconstruction  Opt. Lett.  51  1776 –9

[38]  Ou Z, Liu X, Tang J, Mehmood M Q, Tauqeer T, Dou J, Di J and Qin Y 2026 Physics -guided in -line holographic 

reconstruction via complex -valued multi -scale wavelet decomposition and cross -frequency gated fusion 

Opt. Lett.  51  1784 –7

[39]  Rivenson Y, Zhang Y, Günaydın H, Teng D and Ozcan A 2018 Phase recovery and holographic image 

reconstruction using deep learning in neural networks  Light Sci. Appl.  7 17141 –17141 

[40]  Hervé L, Kraemer D C A, Cioni O, Mandula O, Menneteau M, Morales S and Allier C 2020 Alternation of 

inverse problem approach and deep learning for lens -free microscopy image reconstruction  Sci. Rep.  10 

20207 

[41]  Rogalski M, Arcab P, Stanaszek L, Micó V, Zuo C and Trusiak M 2024 Physics -driven universal twin -image 

removal network for digital in -line holographic microscopy  Opt. Express  32  742 –61 

[42]  Nagahama Y 2022 Phase retrieval using hologram transformation with U -Net in digital holography  Opt. 

Contin.  1 1506 –15 

[43]  Luo H, Xu J, Zhong L, Lu X and Tian J 2022 Diffraction -Net: a robust single -shot holography for multi -distance 

lensless imaging  Opt. Express  30  41724 –40 [44]  Ronneberger O, Fischer P and Brox T 2015 U -Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image 

Segmentation  Medical Image Computing and Computer -Assisted Intervention  – MICCAI 2015  ed N Navab, J 

Hornegger, W M Wells and A F Frangi (Cham: Springer International Publishing) pp 234 –41 

[45]  Feng S, Chen Q, Gu G, Tao T, Zhang L, Hu Y, Yin W and Zuo C 2019 Fringe pattern analysis using deep 

learning  Adv. Photonics  1 025001 

[46]  Cywińska M, Brzeski F, Krajnik W, Patorski K, Zuo C and Trusiak M 2021 DeepDensity: Convolutional neural 

network based estimation of local fringe pattern density  Opt. Lasers Eng.  145  106675 

[47]  He K, Zhang X, Ren S and Sun J 2016 Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition Proceedings of the IEEE 

Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition pp 770 –8

[48] Winnik J, Walocha A and Ogonowski W YOSO software. 

[49]  Winnik J, Walocha A, Ogonowski W, Forjasz W, Arcab P, Rogalski M, Rutkowska A, Stefaniuk M, Picazo 

Bueno J A, Micó V, Trusiak M and Cywińska M 2026 YOSO dataset: in -line holograms from experiments and 

simulation, and trained models for YOSO reconstructio n

[50]  Goodman J W 2005  Introduction to Fourier optics  (Englewood, Colorado: Roberts & Company) 

[51]  Hunter J D 2007 Matplotlib: A 2D Graphics Environment  Comput. Sci. Eng.  9 90 –5

[52]  Bahh B E, Lespinet V, Lurton D, Coussemacq M, Salle G L G L and Rougier A 1999 Correlations Between 

Granule Cell Dispersion, Mossy Fiber Sprouting, and Hippocampal Cell Loss in Temporal Lobe Epilepsy 

Epilepsia  40  1393 –401 

[53]  Łukasiuk K and Lasoń W 2023 Emerging Molecular Targets for Anti -Epileptogenic and Epilepsy Modifying 

Drugs  Int. J. Mol. Sci.  24  2928 

[54]  Agbana T E, Gong H, Amoah A S, Bezzubik V, Verhaegen M and Vdovin G 2017 Aliasing, coherence, and 

resolution in a lensless holographic microscope  Opt. Lett.  42  2271 –4

[55]  Kaggle Flowers Dataset. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/imsparsh/flowers -dataset 

[56]  Huang G, Liu Z, Van Der Maaten L and Weinberger K Q 2017 Densely Connected Convolutional Networks 

2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)  2017 IEEE Conference on 

Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) pp 2261 –9Supplementary Materials 

1.  Rationale for Neural Network Architectural Choices 

The design of the proposed architecture involves selecting key hyperparameters that govern both model capacity and 

computational cost. In particular, we examine the impact of the number of parallel paths and convolutional filters on trainin g

efficiency and  overall model complexity. 

First, we assess the computational cost by  analysing  training time as a function of the number of parallel paths and 

convolutional filters (Table S1).  Increasing the number of paths leads to only a modest rise in training time (from 37 minutes 

for 2 paths to 56 minutes for 6), suggesting that parallel processing is handled efficiently by the hardware. This makes the 

multi -path design relatively cost -effe ctive. Moreover, higher -order paths operate on smaller feature maps, which further 

improves computational  efficiency. In contrast, increasing the number of filters imposes a much greater computational burden, 

scaling less favorably . Training time grows rapidly with model width, from 29 min (8 convolutional filters per layer) to 194 

min (128 filters per layer), indicating that the number of filters is the dominant factor controlling computational cost. 

The above times were obtained for a relatively large number of epochs (i.e., 50) to enable a comprehensive assessment of 

model performance. Due to the time -consuming nature of these experiments, they were conducted on a high -performance 

computing system wi th the following specifications: Ubuntu 24.04.3 LTS (Noble Numbat), Intel Core i9 -14900KS, 192 GB 

RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX 5000 Ada Generation GPU with 32 GB of VRAM. Notably, the training times reported in Table 

S1 would be longer on a standard computing sy stem; in our case, they were approximately three times longer on the mid -range 

desktop PC described in Section 6.3 of the main article. Nevertheless, the overall conclusions regarding the dependence of 

training time on the number of paths and filters remai n unchanged. 

Based on the  time -related  observations, we first selected the number of paths to balance model complexity  (Fig. S1(a))  and 

then fine -tuned the number of filters  (Fig. S1(b))  to improve representational capacity without excessive computational 

overhead.  As shown in Fig. S1(a), increasing the number of paths improves the final loss and stability of training, although the 

gains diminish beyond a  4 paths  point. Therefore,  4 paths  were  chosen to achieve a  favourable  trade -off between performance 

and computationa l cost. 

Next,  as illustrated in Fig.  S1 (b), increasing the number of filters leads to a consistent improvement in training and validation 

loss, indicating higher model capacity. However, this comes at a significantly increased computational cost.  It is also worth 

noting that increasing the number of filters consistently reduces the training loss, while the improvement in validation loss 

remains limited. This indicates that larger models tend to overfit the training data without providing significan t gains in 

genera lization performance.  Consequently, the final  32 filters per convolutional layer  architecture was selected. 

Based on  performed analysis r ecommended training  length is 25 epochs (dashed line in  Fig. S1)  since after that the accuracy 

achieved for validation dataset is not changing signi ficantly. 

Table S1.  Training time  (50 epochs)  for different levels of  model  complexity .

Number of pa rallel  paths 

(fixed number of 32 convolutional filters per layer) 

Number of convolutional filters per layer 

(fixed number of 4 parallel paths) 

2 3 4 5 6 8 16  32  64  128 

Time 

(min)  37  45  51  55  56  29  36  51  90  194 17   

> Figure S1. Selection of model hyperparameters: training and validation loss (logarithmic scale) for (a) different numbers of paths (2 –6)
> with a fixed 32 filters per convolutional layer, and (b) different numbers of filters (8, 16, 32, 64, 128) with a fixed 4 pat hs .

2. Evaluation on  Test  Data 

The selected network architecture was trained using a computer -generated dataset consisting of pairs of  multi -height 

holograms,  𝐼 1, 𝐼 2, obtained  from object field distributions derived from  natural  images  in  the Kaggle Flowers dataset  [1] , as 

described in  Methods s ection of the main  article . A total of 4000 input –target pairs were generated, randomly shuffled, and 

divided into training, validation, and test sets using an 8:1:1 ratio.  In accordance with standard evaluation protocols, the test 

dataset —comprising 400 paired samples —was withheld during the entire training process and used exclusively for the final 

performance assessment. 

Figure S2 presents representative results for four samples from the test dataset. The figure shows the object phase 

distributions (panels  (a), (e), (i), (m)), the corresponding input holograms  𝐼 1 ((b), (f), (j), (n)),  the target holograms  𝐼 2 ((c), ( g),

(k), (o)), and the network -predicted outputs  𝐼 ̃2 ((d), (h), (l), (p)).  To quantitatively assess the reconstruction quality, we 

computed the root mean square error (RMSE) and the structural similarity index measure (SSIM) between the predicted outputs 

𝐼 ̃2 and the corresponding target distributions  𝐼 1. For the four samples shown in Figure S2, the RMSE values are 0.178, 0.159, 

0.084, 0.172, while the SSIM values are 0.688, 0.795, 0.478, 0.358, respectively.  Across the entire test dataset, the average 

performance metrics were RMSE = 0.134 and SSIM = 0.624. 18                    

> Figure S2 .Representative results on the test dataset for four exemplary samples. The object phase distributions are shown in panels
> ((a),(e),(i),(m)). Corresponding input holograms 𝐼 1are presented in ( (b),(f),(j),(n)), target holograms 𝐼 2in ( (c),(g),(k),(o)), and
> the network -predicted outputs 𝐼 ̃2in ( (d),(h),(l),(p)). The displayed samples are drawn from the test set and are representative of the
> overall data distribution.

3. Inference Scalability Across Input Sizes 

In this section, we  investigate  accuracy and inference time of the applied model for different input image sizes. The analysis 

is motivated by the characteristics of U -Net architecture  used in  the  relate  framework  [2] , which require s a fixed input data 

size. In practice, th e fixed input size  restriction  necessitates splitting  the  input  hologram  into smaller patches  (256 × 256)  and 

processing them  individually . Such an approach lead s to reduced accuracy  due to border artefacts  and increased  computational 

time.  In contrast, the multi -scale ResNet  architecture used in this study can process images of arbitrary dimensions. Strictly 

speaking, the input size must be divisible by  2𝑝 −1, where  𝑝  is the number of paths , to  support the  dow nsampling operation. 

However, this  constraint  can be easily  addressed  by applying  minimal  padding —at most  (2𝑝 −1 − 1) pixels —thereby adapting 

the input dimensions to  meet  the model ’s  requirements. 

This section aims to provide an in -depth investigation of the multi -scale ResNet scalability property in terms of time 

efficiency and accuracy. We computed image quality metrics, such as RMSE and SSIM (Fig. S3), by comparing the network 

output obtained for  various input dimensions against that obtained using the training data size. Predictions were performed on 

central crops extracted from the same hologram (cheek cells sample from Sec. 3 of the main article), with sizes ranging from 

256×256 px to 2048×2048  px in steps of 256 px. To focus on the intrinsic capabilities of the multi -scale ResNet while 

minimizing the influence of border effects due to inherent convolution operations, the RMSE and SSIM metrics were evaluated 

within the central 100×100 px region  of each prediction. The obtained  results, i.e.  RMSE  ≈ 0.004  (Fig. S3(a) ), and  SSIM  ≈19 

0.9997  (Fig. S3(b)) , remain practically constant across all analysed image sizes, demonstrating the accuracy -preserving 

scalability of the proposed model architecture.   

> Figure S3 .RMSE (a) and SSIM (b) values as a function of image size.

Notably, in the central prediction region we obtained a perfect match (Fig. S3), whereas discrepancies were observed in the 

border regions, which suffer from edge artefacts inherent to convolutional operations. In this context, the ResNet architectu re 

bene fits from processing full -sized holograms, which naturally helps mitigate boundary effects. The border artefacts affect the 

alternative patch -and -stitch strategy, which exhibits mismatches at the stitched regions . This effect is illustrated in Fig. S4, 

whi ch shows a cropped region of the estimated hologram obtained using a patch -and -stitch approach with 256×256 patches 

and straightforward merging, i.e., direct concatenation of patches.  It is also worth noting that processing the entire hologram in 

a single forward pass is particularly advantageous for the considered digital in -line holographic microscopy (DIHM) problem, 

where defocus conditions lead to spatial beam expansion. Under these  conditions, reducing the computational window 

effectively decreases the  system’s numerical aperture  [3]  and may result in the loss of high -spatial -frequency information .      

> Figure S4.Illustration of challenges associated with the alternative patch -and -stitch procedure. Cropped region of the
> estimated hologram obtained using 256×256 patches processed independently with the muli -scale ResNet and merged
> by direct concatenation, resulting in visible boundary artefacts.

Next, we investigate the inference time of the multi -scale ResNet for various input sizes. To obtain reliable tim e

measurements, a model warm -up procedure was performed prior to actual benchmarking. After 10 warm -up runs per crop size, 20 

inference was executed 10 times, and the average runtime was computed. The obtained results (Fig. S5) show that inference 

time scales approximately linearly with image size (i.e., number of pixels), demonstrating excellent scalability. These resul ts 

also s how that processing the entire hologram at once leads to computational savings, as patch -based processing introduces 

additional overhead associated with dividing and stitching patches. For example, processing a full 2048×2048 hologram 

(approximately 4.2×10 ⁶ pixels) took around 0.75 s (Fig.  S5), whereas applying a basic patch -and -stitch strategy for the same 

image required 4.5 s.   

> Figure S5.Inference time as a function of image pixel count.

In conclusion, the  performed tests  demonstrate that the  multi -sc ale  ResNet  architecture employed in this study can operate 

on images of arbitrary size. This approach provides improved accuracy and inference time relative to  divide -and -stich  approach ,

which  is likely to  introduc e additional errors and increas ed  computational  cost .

References 

[1]  Kaggle Flowers Dataset. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/imsparsh/flowers -dataset 

[2]  Luo H, Xu J, Zhong L, Lu X and Tian J 2022 Diffraction -Net: a robust single -shot holography for multi -distance lensless 

imaging  Opt. Express  30  41724 –40 

[3]  Agbana T E, Gong H, Amoah A S, Bezzubik V, Verhaegen M and Vdovin G 2017 Aliasing, coherence, and resolution in a 

lensless holographic microscope  Opt. Lett.  42  2271 –4