Title: 2026.05.04.721587v1.full.pdf

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Nanoscale rheological heterogeneity revealed by Single Particle orientation Tracking (SPoT) of ultrashort carbon nanotubes in brain tissue 

Limeng RUAN 1,2, Hanna MANKO 1,2, Quentin GRESIL 1,2, Luis A. ALEM ´AN-CASTA ˜NEDA 3,Morgane MERAS 3, Finn L. SEBASTIAN 4, Benjamin FLAVEL 5, Jana ZAUMSEIL 4,Laurent GROC 3, Sophie BRASSELET 3, Marc TONDUSSON 1,2, Laurent COGNET 1,2,∗ 

> 1

University of Bordeaux, Laboratoire Photonique Numerique Et Nanosciences (LP2N), Talence, France  

> 2

LP2N, Institut d’Optique Graduate School & CNRS, Talence, France  

> 3

Aix Marseille University, CNRS, Centrale Marseille, Institut Fresnel, Marseille, France  

> 4

Institute for Physical Chemistry, Universit¨ at Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany  

> 5

Institute of Nanotechnology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, D-76131 Karlsruhe, Germany  

> ∗

laurent.cognet@u-bordeaux.fr 

# Abstract 

Transport in complex biological tissues is governed by local rheological heterogeneity at the nanoscale, yet prob-ing such environments deep inside living systems remains challenging. Here, we introduce an orientation-sensitive single-particle tracking (SPoT) approach that simultaneously resolves translational and rotational dynamics of in-dividual carbon nanotubes deep within biological tissue. By exploiting the intrinsic dipole-like emission and short-wave infrared luminescence of carbon nanotubes enhanced through the incorporation of quantum color-centers our method enables long-duration tracking with high signal-to-noise ratio in optically dense environments. Crucially, the length of these nanotubes can be precisely shortened down to a few tens of nanometers to adapt to diffusion environmental dimensions, further optimizing the tracking applicability. SPoT of single carbon nanotubes provides access to relative changes in local viscosity, steric constraints, and environmental anisotropy. When applied to the brain extracellular space, SPoT demonstrates that local variations in the translational and rotational diffusion of tracers are heterogeneous and not systematically correlated. This allows to disentangle the local effects of viscosity and spatial tortuosity within the brain extracellular space, which are distinct features that would otherwise remain undetected through translational diffusion analysis alone. By enabling combined translational and rotational track-ing of nano-emitters over unprecedented depths and timescales, this work establishes a new framework for probing nanoscale transport and rheological heterogeneity in intact biological tissues and more generally in complex diffusive environments. 

# Introduction 

Understanding the local rheological properties of materials is crucial for a wide range of scientific and indus-trial applications, from biological tissues to porous media and advanced functional materials. In biological systems, local viscosity and viscoelasticity critically regulate fundamental processes such as molecular diffusion [1–3], in-tracellular transport [4], mechanotransduction [5, 6], and tissue morphogenesis [7]. At the microscale, viscosity governs the behavior of complex fluids and molecular transport, thereby influencing both physiological function and the emergence of pathological states [3, 8, 9]. Yet, accessing local viscosity in heterogeneous and crowded bio-logical environments remains a major experimental challenge [10]. Conventional rheological approaches, including bulk rheometry, provide ensemble-averaged measurements and lack the spatial resolution required to probe the intrinsic nanoscale heterogeneity of tissues and cells. Recent advances in biomechanical imaging, such as shear wave elastography, Brillouin microscopy, and optical coherence elastography, have enabled non-invasive mapping of mechanical properties in biological tissues, but these techniques predominantly report elastic moduli and provide only indirect or limited access to viscous dissipation [11–14]. Nanoindentation and atomic force microscopy offer 1

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

submicron mechanical resolution, yet they are generally restricted to surface measurements or ex vivo samples and remain poorly suited for probing dynamic viscosity deep inside living tissue [15–17]. Complementary strategies based on molecular and nanoparticle probes were reported to probe microviscosity in living systems. Viscosity-sensitive fluorescent dyes and molecular rotors have revealed spatially resolved microviscosity maps within cells and organelles, highlighting strong correlations with cellular metabolism and disease states [18–20]. Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) has further improved quantitative microviscosity measurements; however, its applicability remains limited by penetration depth, scattering, and spatial resolution in thick tissues [21]. As a result, high-resolution, non-invasive approaches capable of probing local viscosity deep within complex biological environments remain fundamentally lacking. Among such environments, the brain extracellular space (ECS) is of particular interest. In this key compartment for brain function, molecular transport is governed by a subtle interplay between geometric constraints, molecular crowding, charge, pH, molecular shape and local viscosity, all of which strongly modulate diffusion and signaling in the central nervous system [22,23]. Single-particle tracking (SPT) has transformed the study of nanoscale transport in biological systems, and translational tracking of diffusing probes has provided valuable insights into ECS tor-tuosity and hindered diffusion [24–31]. However, translational motion alone is insufficient to disentangle viscosity from steric and structural constraints. Rotational dynamics of the probes may offer a complementary and powerful dimension, directly reporting on local viscosity, steric hindrance, molecular interactions, and nanoscale anisotropy. Unlike translational motion, rotational dynamics of molecules is exquisitely sensitive to the immediate nanoenvi-ronment and can reveal properties that remain inaccessible through positional tracking alone. The timescales of molecular reorientation may greatly vary depending on the size, anisotropy of the nanotracers to be studied in a specific environment spanning nanoseconds to millisecond and higher. Fluorescence anisotropy which measures fast rotational dynamics lacks spatial resolution and sensitivity to reach the single molecule regime. On the other hand, a number of powerful methods have been recently developped to measure the 3D orientation of single emit-ters, including polarization splitting methods and point spread function (PSF) engineering methods (called ‘Dipole Spread Function’ DSF engineering). These methods have been successfully applied to the study of fixed systems and snapshot measurements in well-controlled model environments, including supported lipid bilayers, two-dimensional crystals, and cell membranes. However, none of these methods could be applied to tracking the orientation of single molecules diffusing in complex environments. This limitation is primarily due to the lack of adequate probes that require orientational dynamics to be resolved into diverse environments and low photobleaching for extended measurements [32–34]. Scattering-based approaches, including differential interference contrast (DIC), defocused dark-field microscopy and cylindrical-polarization-based interferometric scattering microscopy (cypiSCAT), have also been applied to rotational tracking but are generally confined to surface-bound probes or thin samples [35–38]. To date, orientational tracking with long trajectories in deep, optically dense tissues has remained out of reach. Here, we broke these limitations by introducing an approach to perform single particle orientation tracking (SPoT) based on dipole spread functions (DSF) engineering. This method simultaneously resolves translational and rotational dynamics at tens of milliseconds timescales, deep within biological tissue over extended recording times, and with nanoscale spatial precision. Our method exploits short-wave infrared (SWIR)–emitting carbon nanotubes (CNTs) as uniquely suited one-dimensional probes, combining exceptional photostability, strong dipolar emission, and minimal scattering for deep tissue imaging [39,40]. Importantly, by adapting CNT lengths to the environmental conditions, we demonstrate long-term, high-precision tracking in complex biological environments. Building on previous work using SWIR-emitting CNTs to probe molecular diffusion in the brain ECS [24–26, 31, 41–43], SPoT extends their capabilities to orientational tracking. For the first time, we demonstrate simultaneous long-duration tracking of both position and orientation of indi-vidual nanoparticles deep inside living biological tissue. By combining advanced polarization microscopy, dynamic super-localization of SWIR 1D nano-emitters, and deep-learning–based analysis, our approach provides access to local nanoscale signatures of viscosity heterogeneity and environmental anisotropy that are inaccessible to existing techniques. Applying this strategy to the brain ECS, we reveal how extracellular matrix integrity, molecular crowd-ing, and heterogeneous local environments modulate both translational and rotational dynamics. These findings establish a powerful framework for probing nanoscale transport and rheological heterogeneity in intact biological tissues. 

# Results and discussion 

CNTs are one-dimensional nano-emitters in the SWIR domain which cover the NIR-II window [40]. They exhibit high brightness and photostability. Beyond their optical advantages, the anisotropic one-dimensional ge-ometry of CNTs provides unique information during diffusion processes. Their nanoscale diameters enable them to 2

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

diffuse more effectively into complex and confined structures, making them excellent probes for measuring nanoscale bioimaging in deep tissue [24, 44–48]. Obviously, their length must significantly influence their rotational diffusion properties. Precise control over CNT lengths provides a unique opportunity to tailor their diffusion dynamics across diverse environments. This control further enables resolving both translational and orientational dynamics using a single-molecule microscope. To achieve this, we employ CNTs functionalized with quantum defects, which locally trap excitons and create emissive color centers (CCs) along the nanotube backbone [49–52]. Specifically, we syn-thesized bright, biocompatible long and ultrashort CNTs functionalized with oxygen CCs emitting at 1120 nm [43]. These are referred to hereafter as CCNTs, with respective lengths of 550 nm and 50 nm (Figure S1). Importantly, within this length range, the limited spatial resolution of optical microscopes prevents the direct visualization of CCNT orientation. As a result, CCNTs systematically appear as diffraction-limited punctual emitters in recorded images. Due to their characteristic geometry, they behave as emitting dipoles lying along the nanotube longitudinal axis, whose direction can be monitored to retrieve their orientation. The orientation can be described using a unit vector ⃗μ(θ, ϕ ) = [ μ x, μ y , μ z ]T = [sin θ cos ϕ, sin θ sin ϕ, cos θ]T , (1) where z is the optical axis, θ is the polar angle and ϕ is the azimuth angle (Figure 1(a)). In order to measure the dynamic 3D orientation ( θ, ϕ ) combined to a 2D localization (x, y) of single CCNTs in real time along a diffusing trajectory, we present the development of a radially and azimuthally polarized (raPol) microscope in the SWIR domain [53]. The method relies on a single-molecule epi-fluorescence wide-field microscope, where the sample is excited using a circularly polarized laser and the emitted fluorescence is analyzed through polarization engineering at the objective’s back focal plane (BFP) (Figure 1(b)). More precisely, at the BFP which is accessible using an imaging relay system, a vortex half-wave plate (VWP) converts radially and azimuthally polarized components of the fluorescence into two orthogonal linear polarization states. These components are subsequently separated by a polarizing beam splitter, producing two spatially distinct images that are projected side-by-side onto a InGaAs camera allowing detecting single CCNTs emitting in the SWIR [52]. The resulting images encode the orientation information of the emitting dipole. For emitters aligned along the optical axis, the fluorescence is confined to a single polarization channel (x-Radial image, Figure 1(c)). In contrast, emitters oriented within the transverse plane produce DSFs consisting of two lobes in the y-Azimuthal image. In the azimuthal polarization channel, the line connecting the lobe centers directly corresponds to the in-plane orientation angle ϕ. For random orientations, both channels contain information (Figure 1(d)) and by analyzing the relative intensity distribution and spatial structure of these DSFs, the 3D orientation and in plane super-localization of CCNTs can be quantitatively determined. In practice, due to inherent aberrations of the optical assembly, experimental DSFs differ from the exact symmetric double-Gaussian-like shape expected from theory. To retrieve orientational parameters in an accurate way from experimental DSFs, it is nevertheless crucial to account for all possible effects at the origin of DSF-deformations i.e. phase and polarization distorsions present in the emission path of the microscope. To estimate such distorsions in the relay pupil plane of the microscope objective, we use a vectorial phase retrieval method [54] which provides the birefringent distribution at the pupil plane (BDPP). The BDPP can be modeled by a spatially varying Jones matrix, which contain the aberrations and polarization distortions of the setup. In a raPol microscope without optical aberrations, the effective Jones matrix of VWP is given by [55] 

J =

cos φ sin φ

sin φ − cos φ



. (2) To express the matrix elements relative to our experimental setup, we need to take into account all possible states of polarization. Because generating samples with all possible 3D orientations is challenging, a solution is to use nanoparticles which emit unpolarized fluorescence and to generate both a phase and polarization diversity in the emission path by introducing retardation plates. More precisely, we use 100 nm polymeric nanoparticles embedded with gold nanoclusters (GNPs) [56] which emit unpolarized SWIR fluorescence light. These nanoparticles were immobilized on a polylysine coated coverslip for imaging. By combining polarization and phase diversities (Figure 2(a)), the point spread functions (PSFs) generated from the light emitted by GNPs (Figure 2(b)) in the field of view (2 × 40 × 40 μm) are then processed by a nonlinear optimization algorithm to retrieve the experimental BDPP (Figure 2(d)). For this, we averaged 20 images acquired at 100 ms integration time. When comparing the two BDPPs, the experimental system still suffers from slight misalignement evidenced by the shift between the BDPP centers. As well, despite careful optical design, some polarization distorsions in the microscope are visible from the experimental BDPP. Figure 2(e) shows simulated DSFs for dipoles at various orientations, based the experimental BDPP which accounts for optical aberrations of the 3

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 1 (a) The orientation of the CCNT emission dipole is described using a unit vector ⃗ μ(θ, ϕ ).(b) raPol microscope setup schematic. The components are described in the section methods. (c) Simulated DSFs generated by the raPol microscope when dipoles along μx, μ y , μ z axis, respectively. Color bar: intensity. (d) Examples of measured DSFs by raPol microscope. Scale bar: 1 μm. Left: X-Radial DSF. Right: Y-Azimuthal DSF. (e) Schematics of a VWP. Arrows represent the VWP’s fast axis. 

microscope, including polarization aberrations. The simulated DSFs are in close agreement with the experimental observations (Figure 1(d)) validating the BDPP retrieval. Introducing the extracted Jones Matrix of the BDPP in a deep-learning algorithm (Deep-SMOLM), allows then to analyze and obtain the 2D localization and 3D orientation of single CCNTs from the raPol microscope [57]. In order to train the algorithm, we numerically generated 2000 images based on the experimental BDPP. For each training image, we randomly set the number of dipole emitters between 5 and 10, each of them having random 2D localization and 3D orientation. Furthermore, we randomly set the focal imaging position z ∈ [−500 nm , 500 nm]. We also set the emitter intensity following a Poisson distribution (rate parameter = 4) with additive Gaussian noise (μ = 0 , σ = 2), followed by linear gain, offset correction, and thresholding at 50, and is finally scaled by a photon number factor of 500. Furthermore, a uniform background of 20 photons per pixel is added to all pixels. Finally, Poisson noise is added to the images. We first aimed at quantifying the accuracy and precision of our approach to retrieve CCNT orientations and localizations. For this, we generated simulated images of individual emitters with random fixed positions, intensities, and orientations. For each orientation, we analyzed 100 different images with 500 photon. The (non-negative) polar and azimuthal angular distances between the estimated orientation [ ˆθ, ˆϕ] retrieved from Deep-SMOLM and the ground truth orientation [ θ, ϕ ] were calculated to assess orientation accuracy. 

ξ = arccos([sin ˆϕ cos ˆθ, sin ˆϕ cos ˆθ, cos ˆθ][sin ϕ cos θ, sin ϕ cos θ, cos θ]T ). (3) and the orientational precision, by calculating the mean angular standard deviation, 

σδ = 2 arcsin 

r sin( θ)σθ σϕ

π

!

, (4) where σθ and σϕ are the standard deviation of measuring θ and ϕ. For all accessible values of θ and ϕ, we obtain an accuracy (Figure 2 (f)) which is better than 5 ◦, and a precision (Figure 2 (g)) better than 2 ◦. The localization precision are below 8 nm (Figure S2). We estimate that such performance are promising enough to allow experimental determination of single CCNT orientation and localization in one shot. In a first experimental test, we analyzed a sample of (6,5) chirality CCNTs coated with deoxycholate (DOC) (length ≈ 50 nm), exited at 845 nm corresponding to a phonon sideband of (6,5) chirality nanotubes. These CCNTs 4

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 2 (a) Schematic of polarization projection diversity ( λ/ 4 angle) and phase diversity (Z-Scan) for a GNP. (b) Measured phase and polarization diversity stacks. Color bar: intensity. (c) The retrieved elements of the Jones matrix for the BDPP from numerical experiment without aberrations. (d) The retrieved elements of the Jones matrix for the BDPP from experimental data. (e) The DSFs generated by all orientation dipoles simulated using the retrieved BDPP in (d). Color bar: intensity. Left: X-radial PSFs. Right: Y-azimuthal PSFs. (f,g) Deep-SMOLM estimation accuracy (f ) and precision (g). (f ) Non-negative angular distance ξ between the estimated orientation 

hˆθ, ˆϕ

i

and the ground-truth orientation [θ, ϕ ]. (g) Mean angular standard deviation σδ .

were immobilized on a glass coverslip by spin-coating. The objective was to verify the effectiveness of our system with CCNTs mainly oriented around the XY plane. For this test, we have averaged 50 consecutive frames (100 ms per frame) before analyzing CCNT orientations and localizations as exemplified in Figure 3(a). Figure 3(c) shows all the merged results and we found that ϕ displays a uniform distribution, while most of θ values are confined between 60 − 90 ◦. This indicates that as expected after spincoating, most 1D CCNTs are close to parallel to the surface of the coverslip. We next repeated the same experiment, where CCNTs were embedded and immobilized in 5% agarose gels [58]. In this case, CCNT orientation are expected to be randomly distributed in 3D which is observed by our analysis Figure 3(c). Indeed, in this situation, θ spans a much broader range than for spincoated nanotubes. Interestingly, we noticed that CCNTs oriented close to the optical axis of the microscope ( ⃗μ z (θ < 10 ◦)) could not be observed. We attribute this effect to the fact that such nanotubes could not be excited efficiently due to the lack of axial polarization component in the excitation beam (which was set to circular polarization). Nonetheless, such performance where single shot images allow 3D orientational and 2D localization determi-nation of single CCNTs opens the possibility for performing dynamic studies based on single particle tracking experiments. Our next objective was thus to compare rotational diffusion derived from 3D orientation with trans-lational diffusion obtained from 2D positional trajectories. We first conducted dynamic experiments in which CCNTs were dispersed and freely diffused in glycerol/water mixtures at varying concentrations (90%, 80%, and 70%, w/w). Examples of measured DSFs are presented in Figure S3. In such media CCNT show unconstrained translational and rotational motion. Because the rotational diffusion of 1D objects is strongly dependent on their length and on the viscosity of the surrounding medium (hence 5

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 3 The orientations of CCNTs are fixed by spin-coating and 5% agarose. (a, b) CCNT raPol images and their orientation results. The line indicates the azimuthal angle ϕ of each CCNT, and its length and color corresponds to the polar angle θ. The center of the line corresponds to the spatial coordinates of the emitter. Color bar: θ. Left: X-radial DSFs. Right: Y-azimuthal DSFs. Scale bar: 

1 μm. (c) All orientation result and probability density function (PDF) of θ and ϕ of spin-coating (red) and 5% agarose (blue). 

the use of high glycerol concentrations), using 33 ms integration times, SPoT enabled us to resolve orientational diffusion at the single-nanoparticle level when using the longest CCNTs sample having an average length of approx-imately 550 nm. In such unconstrained environments, much smaller nanometric emitters would rotate too rapidly for their orientational state to be accurately resolved and tracked at the integration times required to detect single CCNTs. The trajectories represented on Figure 4(a) allow us to analyze the diffusion characteristics of the CCNTs in the three different glycerol/water mixtures. For this we approximate CCNTs by ellipsoids which can rotate independently around each of its three axes [59], The long axis is the molecule’s orientation and the two short axes are equal in length, much smaller than the long axis. Over a short time interval ∆ t, the angular displacements around these axes are denoted as ( δφ a, δφ b, δφ c). Since rotation around the long axis ( δφ a) does not alter the molecule’s orientation, we set δφ a = 0 ◦, and the rotational diffusion around the two short axes is characterized by a single diffusion coefficient, Dr . Its dependence is based on the shape of the molecule and dynamic viscosity of the medium, η. For CCNTs in the slender-body approximation we can write 

Dr = 3kB TπηL 3 [ln (p) + XR(p)] , (5) where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, L is the length, d is the diameter, p = L/d is the aspect ratio, and XR(p) is a finite-length correction term [60]. For Brownian diffusion, the angular displacements in the nanotube body frame ( δφ b and δφ c) follow a normal distribution: δφ b, δφ c ∼ N (0 , 2Dr ∆t), where N represents a normal distribution. The total body frame displace-ment is then calculated by summing the displacements over each time step. [ ˆ φb, ˆφc] = [ Pni=2 ∆φib, Pni=2 ∆φic] (6) where i is ith time step. The mean-squared angular displacement (MSAD) can then be expressed as MSAD( tlag = m∆t) = [δ ˆφb(tlag )] 2 + [ δ ˆφc(tlag )] 2

= 4 Dr tlag 

(7) This indicates that one can obtain Dr from the local slope of the MSAD. For an anisotropic particle, translational motion can be decomposed into components parallel and perpendicular to its orientation characterized by two independent diffusion coefficient D∥ and D⊥, respectively. Having access 6

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

to the orientation of a single CCNT thus allows to express two mean-square displacements (MSDs) in the CCNT body frame (ˆ x, ˆy), MSD ∥(tlag ) = [∆ˆ x]2 = 2 D∥tlag 

MSD ⊥(tlag ) = [∆ˆ y]2 = 2 D⊥tlag , (8) which can also be used to obtain in the laboratory frame where the particule coordinates are (x, y) one can also defined the mean-square displacement (MSD) in the laboratory frame ( x, y )MSD( tlag ) = [∆ x]2 + [∆ y]2 = 4 Dt lag , (9) here where 

D = kB T

3πηL [log ( p) + XT (p)] (10) is diffusion coefficient and XT (p) is also a finite-length correction term [60]. Interestingly, the MSDs calculated in the lab frame and in the CCNT body frame are linked by the following relation [61]: 

D = ( D∥ + D⊥)/2 (11) Having the CCNT orientation, we can also calculate the reorientational timecorrelation function (RTF) [62,63] which allow to determine the rotational correlation time ( τ ) of the nanotube movement, 

C(tlag = m∆t) = ⟨P2(⃗μ(t + m∆t) ·⃗μ(t)) ⟩ = Se −tlag /τ , (12) where S is constant. In practice τ is the characteristic timescale over which molecular orientations lose memory of their initial direction and P2 is the second-order Legendre polynomial. Figure 4(a) displays the Brownian trajectories of a CCNT in 90% glycerol recorded by SPoT. Accordingly, displaying θ and ϕ at each position in the trajectory (Figure 4(b-c)) indicates that the CCNT experiences random orientations along the trajectory. A total of 16 such trajectories were analyzed, and the time-ensemble-averaged MSD was further calculated [64] and displayed in Figure 4(d). As expected, the MSD of CCNTs subject to Brownian motion calculated in the lab frame is linear, and a linear fit yields a diffusion coefficient of D = 0 .03 μm2/s. In the CCNT body frame, the diffusion along the long axis ( D∥) is faster than that along the short axis ( D⊥), and the diffusion coefficient satisfies the expected relation: D = ( D∥ + D⊥)/2. For rotational diffusion, a linear fit to the MSAD gives a rotational diffusion coefficient of Dr = 0 .3 rad 2/s (Figure 4(f)), which matches the expected value of 0.5 rad 2/s assuming CCNTs of 550 nm length, 2 .3 nm diameter and based on a value of η90% = 0 .25 Pa · s for 90% glycerol determined by SPT of calibrated spherical particles ( R = 12 nm , D = 0 , 07 μm2/s)). Finally, we computed the RTF (Figure 4(g)) and we find a τ = 0 .4 s. Since glycerol is an isotropic liquid, the rotational correlation time satisfies τ = 1 /6Dr .We next compared the results obtained for the different glycerol water concentration (90%, 80%, and 70%, w/w) and displayed the results in Figure 4(e-g). Qualitatively, we find that as the viscosity increases, both the translational diffusion and the rotational diffusion of single CCNTs slow down, while τ increases accordingly. Quantitatively, considering Equation 10 and 5, the difffusion coefficients depend on both the CCNTs size (L, d ) and the environmental viscosity ( η). First, localization precision (in x and y) during tracking are σ90% =36 nm , σ 80% = 61 nm , σ 70% = 99 nm as retrieved from the intercept at zero time delay [65]. As we used identical CCNT solution, the influence of CCNTs size is effectively averaged out. We thus expect that both translational and rotational diffusion coefficients should follow the same scaling relation D, D r ∝ 1/η and for the same type of particle, the ratios of diffusion coefficients in environments with different viscosity are theoretically equivalent. In order to determine the scaling of viscosity ( η) between the 3 samples we performed an independent SPT experiments using highly monodisperse and spherical fluorescent nanoparticles (NP). The NP diameter was 24 ± 2 nm. We found the following ratios between the 3 water:glycerol solutions 

DNP ,90% : DNP ,80% : DNP ,70% = 1

η90% 

: 1

η80% 

: 1

η70% 

= 1 : 2 .7 : 5 .8. (13) Such values can now be quantitatively compared to the translational diffusion coefficients obtained with CCNTs (Figure 4(e,f)), 

D90% : D80% : D70% = 1 : 2 .3 : 5 .3 (14) and 

Dr, 90% : Dr, 80% : Dr, 70% = 1 : 2 .3 : 3 .7 (15) 7

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 4 The trajectories and analyzed results of CCNTs in glycerol. (a–c) A trajectory of CCNTs in 90% glycerol. Color bar: (a) time, (b) azimuthal angle ϕ, (c) polar angle θ. (d) MSDs of CCNTs with D∥ = 0 .04 μm2/s and D⊥ = 0 .03 μm2/s) for 90% glycerol. Blue dashed line: the slope is 2( D∥ + D⊥).(e) MSDs in the lab frame for 90% , 80%, and 70% glycerol. (f ) MSADs, and (g) RTF for CCNTs in 90%, 80%, and 70% glycerol. 

8

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The translational diffusion coefficient ratio obtained with 1D CCNTs closely matches those obtained by the spherical NPs validating the experimental recordings. Concerning the rotational diffusion coefficient, obtained for CCNTs, one finds: The agreement is also excellent for 90% and 80% glycerol, while for 70% glycerol, the expected rotational diffusion coefficient is larger than experimentally observed result. We attribute this observation to the fact that while the imaging exposure time needed to perform efficient translational determination is short enough, the rapid rotational diffusion of CCNTs in 70% glycerol prevents accurate determination of their orientation within the same timeframe. This sets a limit to the rotational diffusion constant that can be captured by our setup. While the glycerol experiments allow unrestricted motion in a homogeneous viscous environment, most biolog-ical media impose structural constraints and often exhibit spatial heterogeneities in viscosity. To replicate steric hindrance in a uniform viscosity environment, we next examined the diffusion of CCNTs within 2% aqueous agarose gels. This system provides a controlled porous matrix that selectively restricts molecular motion, thereby mimick-ing the effects of spatial confinement. Figure 5(a-d) show a CCNT trajectory obtained in 2% agarose gels where translational and angular positions of the CCNT are color coded. Qualitatively one unambiguously observe that in such environments, rotational diffusion is partially hindered by the agarose network (Figure 5(d)). This situation has been extensively studied previously for long nanotube which length could be optically resolved (typically lengths 

> 1 μm) and which could be either considered as rigid rods like here, and semi-flexible filaments when nanotubes are significantly longer [66, 67]. Accordingly, we observe owing to the rotational tracking of CCNTs that cannot be resolved optically, that in 2% agarose gel, such 550 nm long CCNTs can not rotate freely; instead, they undergo reciprocating motion along their longitudinal axis until reorientation occurs in the next agarose pocket (Figure 5(a-c)). We next calculate the MSD in lab frame, and observe that the MSD display a sublinear behavior while MSDs in body frame display a linear evolution. This behavior, previously reported [24], arises from environmental constraints that induce anomalous diffusion over the timescales relevant to the exploration of local gel regions. Analysis of rotational diffusion based on MSAD and RTF yields Dr equal to 0 .6 rad 2/s and τ equal to 0 .2 s (Figure 5(f,g)). We finally demonstrate our methodology to a biological application, namely the study of molecular diffusion in the extracellular space (ECS) in mouse organotypic brain slices. As mentioned in the introduction of this article, translational SPT opened the route toward a finer understanding of molecular diffusion hallmarks in the tortuous ECS but our understanding of the respective impact of viscosity and ECS structure remains to be elucidated [68] and we hypothesize that rotational diffusion tracking will provide novel insights. The ECS is indeed a network of interconnected microdomains bounded by neuronal membranes and filled with interstitial fluid and the extracellular matrix (ECM) which contribute to the local viscosity. In such a system, the diffusion of one-dimensional objects is both highly constrained and heterogeneous, owing to spatial confinement and local variations in effective viscosity [24,25,28]. To probe this diversity while retaining sensitivity to rotational diffusion, we adapted the CCNT length to short dimensions as long nanotubes would not rotate efficiently in the crowded brain ECS. We used biocompatible ultrashort CCNTs (length ≈ 50 nm) coated with phospholipid–PEG. These ultrashort CCNTs display an exceptional brightness and photostability in SWIR, combined with their small dimensions, which facilitate diffusion within biological tissues [43]. We use organotypic slices which allow several aspects of structural connectivity of the original tissue to be preserved [69]. Incubation with CCNTs-containing medium enables widespread probe penetration and yields a substantially larger number of trajectories, facilitating robust statistical analysis (Figure 6(a)). Figure 6(d) presents typical single CCNT trajectories color coded by instantaneous translational ( D) and rotational ( Dr ) diffusion coefficients calculated on a time window of 330 ms thus corresponding to 10 data points, as well as by in plane and out of plane angles. Diffusion in the brain ECS exhibited a strong heterogeneity not seen in homogenous medium nor in agarose gels. Most interestingly, this analysis indicates that local variations of D

and Dr are not systematically correlated revealing local organization of the brain ECS that translational diffusion analysis alone would not reveal. More precisely, when both diffusion coefficients ( D and Dr ) are high, this indicates facilitated diffusion (low vis-cosity and unconstrained (rotational) diffusion. This can happen in what would visually appear like narrow channels yet still displaying fast varying CCNT orientation and fast translational movements (see stars in Figure 6(d)(i,ii)) In contrast, we can observe that in visually the same type of channels where translational diffusion indicates low viscosity like just described, rotational diffusion can be hindered (corresponding to preferred nanotube orientation see Figure 6(d)(iii,iv))) due to the presence of nearby obstacles (arrows). In other channel types, both translational and rotational diffusion coefficients are low indicating high viscosity and the presence of obstacles (triangle in Fig-ure 6(d)(i-iv)). Such observation indicate that structural and viscosity contributions can be disentangled by the combined analysis of translational and rotational diffusion. To gain further insights about the impact of brain ECS organization we finally performed a chemical modula-9

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 5 (a–c) Trajectories of CCNTs in 2% agarose. Color bar: (a) time, (b) azimuthal angle ϕ, (c) polar angle θ. (d) Schematic of an CCNT moving within the 2% agarose network. (e) MSDs of CCNTs in 2% agarose gel. Blue dashed line: the slope is 2( D∥ + D⊥). (f,g) MSAD (f ) and RTF (g) for CCNTs in 2%agarose. 

10 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint tion of the ECS structure by a standard enzymatic disruption of the ECM structure. In the intact ECM, hyaluronan (HA) indeed forms a continuous backbone that anchors chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) and associated crosslinking proteins [70, 71] (Figure 6(a)). However, upon hyaluronidase (Hyase) application, HA can enzymati-cally cleaved into short fragments, causing destructuration of the ECM. This remodelling of the ECM is expected to reduce structural integrity and affecting both local viscosity and the physical barriers that impede molecular diffusion [26] (Figure 6(a)). Figure 6(b,c) summarize the translational and rotational diffusion behaviors of CCNTs in intact and degraded ECM slices. The probability distributions of log( D) and log( Dr ) which can be fitted with a Gaussian Mixture Model, show an increases in both translational and rotational diffusivities. The dominant peak of the translational diffusion coefficient shifts from DNormal = 0 .004 μm2/s to DHyase = 0 .006 μm2/s, while the characteristic rotational diffusivity increases from Dr, Normal = 0 .1 rad 2/s to Dr, Hyase = 0 .3 rad 2/s. Together, these observations suggest that Hyase-mediated ECM disruption globally reduces both ECS viscosity and diffusion obstacle crowding. Notably, a detailed analysis of the spatial correlations between these diffusivities shows no sys-tematic correlation, highlighting further that orientational tracking yields complementary insights that translational tracking alone cannot provide as seen in Figure 6(e)(i-iv) which displays examples of single CCNT trajectories in enzymatically degraded brain slices. Distinct behaviors can indeed be distinguished that we attribute to the fact that the effect of Hyase is not homogeneous. The top region (square) does not appear to have been strongly affected by Hyase displaying rather heterogeneous areas where diffusion can be hindered and slow as revealed in control brain slices. The other bottom regions (circle) display more homogeneous behaviors where CCNTs display both facilitated translational and rotational diffusion in large domains. Interestingly, in such ‘tortuosity map’, displaying these large domains, a finer analysis of nanotube orientations reveals the presence of distinct subdomains charac-terized by well-defined CCNT alignments (Figure 6(e)(iii,iv)). One may attribute this observation to a localized structuration of the ECM, which imposes spatial constraints on CCNT orientations within confined microenviron-ments which may involve different components of the ECM, or cellular processes heterogeneity. Due to low viscosity of the medium upon HA digestion (Figure 6(e)(i)), CCNTs undergo rapid and efficient exploration of these sub-domains, also exhibiting fast rotational as demonstrated by the high in Dr values in the circled area as compared to rectangular one (Figure 6(e)(ii)). As can be seen in Figure 6(e)(iii,iv), CCNTs are however more likely to move along their long axis, a similar observation as agarose experiment. Therefore in this non-Brownian motion situation imposed by local structure of the ECM, CCNTs exhibit directional properties which defines these patches while translational diffusion, likely facilitates transitions between these structured regions. Altogether, such ‘tortuosity map’ featuring well-defined patches with stable and distinct orientations could not have been inferred from transla-tional tracking alone. To unambiguously establish the existence of such local ECM organization in degraded brain tissue, further investigations will be required. These would require finer modulation of ECM properties which is beyond the scope of the present study which aimed to illustrate the potential orientational tracking to provide novel rheological understanding of complex tissue. 

# Conclusion 

In summary, we presented an innovative approach to investigate local rheological features of complex envi-ronments at high spatial resolution. This achievement was enabled by the unique properties of fluorescent carbon nanotubes combined with single particle orientation tracking in the SWIR domain. High aspect ratio of CCNTs facilitates orientation measurements at the single-particle level, while their exceptional brightness and photosta-bility in the SWIR range allow for deep and stable imaging of individual particles over extended periods, even in intricate environments. Additionally, the bio-compatibility of CCNTs, together with the ability to tailor their length through quantum defect functionalization, provides a versatile approach: this adaptability allows precise tuning of their rotational behavior to match the dimensions of the environment, making them suitable for capture and dynamic analysis at the single nanotube level. By measuring the diffusion of CCNTs of different lengths, we revealed the strong influence of length on rotational diffusion speed. By measuring both the rotational and transla-tional diffusion of a single diffusing CCNT, we could reveal and disentangle the effects of viscosity and confinement heterogeneities within complex environments, which would not be possible by translational diffusion alone. We validated this approach in the brain extracellular space, a complex, key yet poorly understood microenvironment whose structural and compositional properties are known to profoundly influence brain function in both physio-logical and pathological contexts. Using ultrashort CCNTs, we were able to measure the diffusion of single CCNT within the ECS, revealing its structural complexity and role of ECM. This work paves the way for new strategies to explore heterogeneous environments at the nanoscale, with broad applications ranging from biology to materials science. 11 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 6 (a) Schematic of the effects of hyaluronidase (Hyase) on the extracellular matrix (ECM) within the brain extracellular space (ECS). (b-c) The probability distributions of log( D) (b) and log( Dr ) (c) are fitted by a Gaussian Mixture Model. (d-e) 2D ECS images of instantaneous translational (i)) and rotational (ii) diffusion and their ϕ (iii) and θ (iv) map for normal (d) and Hyase (e) brain slices. Scale bar: 0.5 μm.

12 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Methods 

Radially and azimuthally polarized (raPol) microscope A dichroic mirror (DM1, DMLP900R) reflects a circularly polarized laser to excite the sample above the objective lens (OL, Nikon CFI75Apo25XCW). The emitted fluorescence is collected by the objective, filtered by DM1 and a longpass filter (LP, Chroma, ET900LP) in order to eliminate completely the excited laser light. It is then focussed by a tube lens (TL, f=200 mm) to form an intermediate image. A second dichroic mirror is added (DM2), similar to DM1 but oriented in a perpendicular plane to compensate the small elliptical polarization effect added by DM1. A 4f system (L1,f1=100 mm; L2, f2=200 mm) is used to engineer the fluorescence at the back focal plane (BFP). The vortex half waveplate (VWP,Thorlabs WPV10L-980) is inserted at the BFP to convert the radially and azimuthally polarization into x- and y-polarization, respectively. A polarizing beamsplitter (PBS, Thorlabs CCM1-PBS225/M) is placed after L2 to separate the x-radial and y- azimuthal polarized fluorescence. Two mirror (M1,2) and a prism mirror (PM, Thorlabs MRAK25-P01) are used to generate side by side two images on a single InGaAs camera (Ninox 640, Raptor). 

Polarization and phase diversities In standard phase retrieval algorithms, which do not account for polariza-tion, a Z-stack, i.e. a series of intensity images captured at different focal distances from the optimal focus, can provide the required phase diversity. This diversity not only helps the algorithm avoiding local minima during con-vergence but also enables discrimination between vortices with opposite topological charges. However, for BDPP determination which encodes the polarization information, a Z-stack alone cannot differentiate the true J from its unitary transformations JU = U · J, where U is a constant unitary matrix ( U U † = I), which produces identical intensity patterns across the stack. Therefore, polarization diversity must also be introduced which is performed by placing a λ/ 4 placed after the VWP (Figure 2(a)).Rotating the λ/ 4 plate indeed generates multiple polarization projections of the output, providing additional constraints for the vectorial phase retrieval. In practice, the phase diversity is obtained by a Z-stack made of images acquired between -2 and 2 mm around the reference focal plane by increments of 400nm, and the polarization diversity by rotated the λ/ 4 waveplate from 0 to π/ 2 in steps of π/ 6. Each diversity DSF was acquired by averaging 20 images with 100ms integration time. 

CCNT preparation CCNTs were prepared following the protocol reported in previous work [43, 72]. Briefly, monochiral (6,5)-SWCNTs were sorted by aqueous two-phase extraction (ATPE) as described previously [73] and shortened by extended tip sonication. They were then functionalization with luminescent oxygen defects via a Fenton-like reaction with copper(II) sulfate (CuSO 4(H 2O) 5) and sodium L-ascorbate according to the established protocol [72] and eventually followed by surfactant exchange to PL-PEG5000 (Avanti Lipids) via dialysis for bio-logical applications. 

Spin-coating CCNT Samples The DOC-CCNTs solution was diluted 1:9 with distilled water. A coverslip is covered by 70 μL polyvinypyrrolidone (PVP) 3 times. A 30 μL aliquot of the diluted solution of CCNTs was deposited onto the coverslip, which was then spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s to immobilize the CCNTs on its surface. Then, It is imaged by SPoT microscope with 100ms expsure time. 

5% agarose-CCNT Samples A 5% agarose solution was prepared by dissolving 0 .75 g of agarose in 15 mL of distilled water. Subsequently, 0 .5 μL of DOC sp 3 CCNT solution was mixed with 250 μL of 5% agarose. The mixture was deposited onto a coverslip and allowed to sit for 30 min at room temperature to ensure CCNTs immobilization. 

Glycerol-CCNT Samples To prepare glycerol solutions, 90% glycerol was obtained by mixing 9 mL of glycerol with 1 mL of distilled water. Similarly, 80% and 70% glycerol solutions were prepared by mixing appropriate volumes of glycerol and distilled water. Subsequently, 0 .5 μL of DOC sp 3 CCNT solution was added to 250 μLof each glycerol solution (90%, 80%, and 70%, respectively). Samples were mounted between a glass slide and a coverslip and incubated for 30 min to minimize flow prior to SPoT measurements.. 

2% agarose-CCNT Samples A 2% agarose solution was prepared by dissolving 0.6 g of agarose in 15 mL of distilled water. Subsequently, 0 .5 μL of the DOC sp 3 CCNT solution was mixed with 250 μL of 2% agarose. The mixture was then deposited between a glass slide and a coverslip and allowed to solidify for 30 min at room temperature. 

Organotypic Slice Organotypic brain slice cultures were prepared as previously described [25, 28]. Hippocampal 13 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

slices were obtained from postnatal day 5 to day 7 Sprague–Dawley rat pups and cultured for up to 14 days on hydrophilic polytetrafluoroethylene (FHLC) membranes (0 .45 μm, Millipore) placed on Millicell cell culture inserts (Millipore, 0 .4 mm thickness, 30 mm diameter). The culture medium was changed every 2–3 days. For single-particle tracking experiments, ultrashort color-center-bearing carbon nanotubes (uCCNTs) were prepared as previously described [43]. Slices were incubated in 190 μL of culture medium mixed with 10 μL of uCCNT solution for 2 h at 35 ◦C under 5% CO 2. Imaging was performed in HEPES-based artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) containing 145 mM NaCl, 4 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl 2 · 2H 2O, 1 .0 mM MgCl 2 · 6H 2O, 10 mM HEPES, and 10 mM D-glucose (osmolarity ∼310 mOsm, pH 7.35), with the temperature maintained at 35 ◦C using a temperature controller (Tokai Hit). The slices was imaged through a coverslip. 

Hyaluronidase treatment Hippocampal slices were incubated with hyaluronidase enzyme (H3631, Sigma) at a dilution of 50 U /μ L for 4 h, as previously described [25]. Subsequently, the slices were incubated with ultrashort color-center-bearing carbon nanotubes (uCCNTs) for 2 h and imaged in HEPES-based artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF). 

# Acknowlegments 

We thank the Cell Biology Facility for managing cell biology-related activities, especially Delphine Bouchet. We also thank Xavier Le Guevel (Universit´ e Grenoble-Alpes) and Andreas Reisch (Universit´ e de Strasbourg) for providing the polymeric nanoparticles (GNPs). L.C. and L.G. acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council Synergy grant (951294). L.C. acknowledges support from Agence Nationale de la Recherche (EUR Light&T, PIA3 Program, ANR-17-EURE-0027), the France-Bioimaging National Infrastructure (ANR-10-INBS-04-01), and the Idex Bordeaux (Grand Research Program GPR LIGHT). LR is financially supported by the China Scholarship Council (Grant No. 202208330010). L.A.A-C. and S.B. acknowledge support from Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-21-CE24-0014). F.L.S.,and J.Z. acknowledge funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant Agreement No. 817494 “TRIFECTS”). J.Z. acknowledges additional support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy for the Excellence Cluster “3D Matter Made to Order” (EXC- 2082/1 - 390761711). 14 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# References 

[1] Jedrzej Szyma´ nski, Adam Patkowski, Agnieszka Wilk, Piotr Garstecki, and Robert Holyst. Diffusion and viscos-ity in a crowded environment: From nano- to macroscale. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B , 110(51):25593– 25597, December 2006. [2] Shima Parsa, Enric Santanach-Carreras, Lizhi Xiao, and David A. Weitz. Origin of anomalous polymer-induced fluid displacement in porous media. Physical Review Fluids , 5(2):022001, February 2020. [3] Kaustav Bera, Alexander Kiepas, Inˆ es Godet, Yizeng Li, Pranav Mehta, Brent Ifemembi, Colin D. Paul, Anindya Sen, Selma A. Serra, Konstantin Stoletov, Jiaxiang Tao, Gabriel Shatkin, Se Jong Lee, Yuqi Zhang, Adrianna Boen, Panagiotis Mistriotis, Daniele M. Gilkes, John D. Lewis, Chen-Ming Fan, Andrew P. Feinberg, Miguel A. Valverde, Sean X. Sun, and Konstantinos Konstantopoulos. Extracellular fluid viscosity enhances cell migration and cancer dissemination. Nature , 611(7935):365–373, November 2022. [4] Sander Pronk, Erik Lindahl, and Peter M. Kasson. Dynamic heterogeneity controls diffusion and viscosity near biological interfaces. Nature Communications , 5(1):3034, January 2014. [5] Claudia Tanja Mierke. Viscoelasticity, like forces, plays a role in mechanotransduction. Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology , 10, February 2022. [6] Ovijit Chaudhuri, Justin Cooper-White, Paul A. Janmey, David J. Mooney, and Vivek B. Shenoy. Effects of extracellular matrix viscoelasticity on cellular behaviour. Nature , 584(7822):535–546, August 2020. [7] Nicoletta I. Petridou, Silvia Grigolon, Guillaume Salbreux, Edouard Hannezo, and Carl-Philipp Heisenberg. Fluidization-mediated tissue spreading by mitotic cell rounding and non-canonical wnt signalling. Nature Cell Biology , 21(2):169–178, February 2019. [8] Seungman Park, Wei-Hung Jung, Matthew Pittman, Junjie Chen, and Yun Chen. The effects of stiffness, fluid viscosity, and geometry of microenvironment in homeostasis, aging, and diseases: A brief review. Journal of Biomechanical Engineering , 142(10):100804, October 2020. [9] Arthur T. Molines, Jo¨ el Lemi` ere, Morgan Gazzola, Ida Emilie Steinmark, Claire H. Edrington, Chieh-Ting Hsu, Paula Real-Calderon, Klaus Suhling, Gohta Goshima, Liam J. Holt, Manuel Thery, Gary J. Brouhard, and Fred Chang. Physical properties of the cytoplasm modulate the rates of microtubule polymerization and depolymerization. Developmental Cell , 57(4):466–479.e6, February 2022. [10] Siddhartha Gupta, William S. Wang, and Siva A. Vanapalli. Microfluidic viscometers for shear rheology of complex fluids and biofluids. Biomicrofluidics , 10(4):043402, July 2016. [11] Manish Bhatt, Marine A. C. Moussu, Boris Chayer, Fran¸ cois Destrempes, Marc Gesnik, Louise Allard, An Tang, and Guy Cloutier. Reconstruction of viscosity maps in ultrasound shear wave elastography. IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control , 66(6):1065–1078, June 2019. [12] Giuliano Scarcelli, William J. Polacheck, Hadi T. Nia, Kripa Patel, Alan J. Grodzinsky, Roger D. Kamm, and Seok Hyun Yun. Noncontact three-dimensional mapping of intracellular hydromechanical properties by brillouin microscopy. Nature Methods , 12(12):1132–1134, December 2015. [13] Robert Prevedel, Alba Diz-Mu˜ noz, Giancarlo Ruocco, and Giuseppe Antonacci. Brillouin microscopy: An emerging tool for mechanobiology. Nature Methods , 16(10):969–977, October 2019. [14] Antoine Ramier, Behrouz Tavakol, and Seok-Hyun Yun. Measuring mechanical wave speed, dispersion, and viscoelastic modulus of the cornea using optical coherence elastography. Optics Express , 27(12):16635–16649, June 2019. [15] Do-Gyoon Kim, Sarandeep S. Huja, Hye Ri Lee, Boon Ching Tee, and Sarah Hueni. Relationships of viscosity with contact hardness and modulus of bone matrix measured by nanoindentation. Journal of Biomechanical Engineering , 132(024502), January 2010. [16] Radmacher Manfred. Measuring the elastic properties of living cells by the atomic force microscope. Methods in Cell Biology , 68:67–90, 2002. 15 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[17] E. M. Darling, S. Zauscher, and F. Guilak. Viscoelastic properties of zonal articular chondrocytes measured by atomic force microscopy. Osteoarthritis and Cartilage , 14(6):571–579, June 2006. [18] Marina K. Kuimova. Mapping viscosity in cells using molecular rotors. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics ,14(37):12671–12686, 2012. [19] James A. Levitt, Pei-Hua Chung, Marina K. Kuimova, Gokhan Yahioglu, Yan Wang, Junle Qu, and Klaus Suhling. Fluorescence anisotropy of molecular rotors. ChemPhysChem , 12(3):662–672, 2011. [20] Mark A. Haidekker, Matthew Nipper, Adnan Mustafic, Darcy Lichlyter, Marianna Dakanali, and Emmanuel A. Theodorakis. Dyes with segmental mobility: Molecular rotors. In Alexander P. Demchenko, editor, Advanced Fluorescence Reporters in Chemistry and Biology I: Fundamentals and Molecular Design , pages 267–308. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010. [21] Rupsa Datta, Tiffany M. Heaster, Joe T. Sharick, Amani A. Gillette, and Melissa C. Skala. Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy: Fundamentals and advances in instrumentation, analysis, and applications. Journal of Biomedical Optics , 25(7):071203, May 2020. [22] Charles Nicholson and Eva Sykov´ a. Extracellular space structure revealed by diffusion analysis. Trends in Neurosciences , 21(5):207–215, May 1998. [23] Eva Sykov´ a and Charles Nicholson. Diffusion in brain extracellular space. Physiological Reviews , 88(4):1277– 1340, October 2008. [24] Antoine G. Godin, Juan A. Varela, Zhenghong Gao, No´ emie Dann´ e, Julien P. Dupuis, Brahim Lounis, Laurent Groc, and Laurent Cognet. Single-nanotube tracking reveals the nanoscale organization of the extracellular space in the live brain. Nature Nanotechnology , 12(3):238–243, March 2017. [25] Chiara Paviolo, Federico N. Soria, Joana S. Ferreira, Antony Lee, Laurent Groc, Erwan Bezard, and Laurent Cognet. Nanoscale exploration of the extracellular space in the live brain by combining single carbon nanotube tracking and super-resolution imaging analysis. Methods (San Diego, Calif.) , 174:91–99, March 2020. [26] Federico N. Soria, Chiara Paviolo, Evelyne Doudnikoff, Marie-Laure Arotcarena, Antony Lee, No´ emie Dann´ e, Amit Kumar Mandal, Philippe Gosset, Benjamin Dehay, Laurent Groc, Laurent Cognet, and Erwan Bezard. Synucleinopathy alters nanoscale organization and diffusion in the brain extracellular space through hyaluronan remodeling. Nature Communications , 11(1):3440, July 2020. [27] Michael McKenna, David Shackelford, Ceza Pontes, Brendan Ball, and Elizabeth Nance. Multiple particle tracking detects changes in brain extracellular matrix and predicts neurodevelopmental age. ACS Nano ,15(5):8559–8573, May 2021. [28] Diego Grassi, Agata Idziak, Antony Lee, Ivo Calaresu, Jean-Baptiste Sibarita, Laurent Cognet, U. Valentin N¨ agerl, and Laurent Groc. Nanoscale and functional heterogeneity of the hippocampal extracellular space. 

Cell Reports , 42(5):112478, May 2023. [29] Lei Wang, Hua-Jie Chen, Zhi-Gang Wang, Di Ning, Wei Zhao, Virgile Rat, Don C. Lamb, Dai-Wen Pang, and Shu-Lin Liu. Mapping extracellular space features of viral encephalitis to evaluate the proficiency of anti-viral drugs. Advanced Materials , 36(18):2311457, May 2024. [30] Hua-Jie Chen, Liang Zhao, Lei Wang, Zhi-Gang Wang, Dai-Wen Pang, and Shu-Lin Liu. Simultaneous map-ping of the nanoscale organization and redox state of extracellular space in living brain tissue. ACS Nano ,18(33):22245–22256, August 2024. [31] J. Estaun-Panzano, S. Nandi, Q. Gresil, E. Doudnikoff, C. Mazzocco, M. L. Arotcarena, M. H. Canron, B. Dehay, L. Cognet, and E. Bezard. Intracellular α-synuclein assemblies are sufficient to alter nanoscale diffusion in the striatal extracellular space. NPJ Parkinson’s disease , 10(1):236, December 2024. [32] Sophie Brasselet and Matthew D. Lew. Single-molecule orientation and localization microscopy. Nature Pho-tonics , 19(9):925–937, September 2025. [33] Caio Vaz Rimoli, Cesar Augusto Valades-Cruz, Valentina Curcio, Manos Mavrakis, and Sophie Brasselet. 4polar-storm polarized super-resolution imaging of actin filament organization in cells. Nature Communications ,13(1):301, January 2022. 16 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[34] Tianben Ding and Matthew D. Lew. Single-molecule localization microscopy of 3d orientation and anisotropic wobble using a polarized vortex point spread function. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B , 125(46):12718– 12729, November 2021. [35] Yan Gu, Wei Sun, Gufeng Wang, and Ning Fang. Single particle orientation and rotation tracking discloses distinctive rotational dynamics of drug delivery vectors on live cell membranes. Journal of the American Chemical Society , 133(15):5720–5723, April 2011. [36] Gufeng Wang, Wei Sun, Yong Luo, and Ning Fang. Resolving rotational motions of nano-objects in engineered environments and live cells with gold nanorods and differential interference contrast microscopy. Journal of the American Chemical Society , 132(46):16417–16422, November 2010. [37] Junho Lee and Ji Won Ha. Defocused dark-field orientation imaging of single gold microrods on synthetic membranes. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics , 19(36):24453–24457, September 2017. [38] Milan Vala, Ivan Kopal, Lauren Takiguchi, Yevhenii Shaidiuk, V´ ıtˇ ezslav Luˇ zn´ y, Lukasz Bujak, Pallav Kosuri, and Marek Piliarik. Measuring nanoscale torques with cylindrical-polarization-based interferometric scattering microscopy. https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.08373v1, January 2026. [39] Guosong Hong, Shuo Diao, Alexander L. Antaris, and Hongjie Dai. Carbon nanomaterials for biological imaging and nanomedicinal therapy. Chemical Reviews , 115(19):10816–10906, October 2015. [40] Michael J. O’Connell, Sergei M. Bachilo, Chad B. Huffman, Valerie C. Moore, Michael S. Strano, Erik H. Haroz, Kristy L. Rialon, Peter J. Boul, William H. Noon, Carter Kittrell, Jianpeng Ma, Robert H. Hauge, R. Bruce Weisman, and Richard E. Smalley. Band gap fluorescence from individual single-walled carbon nanotubes. 

Science , 297(5581):593–596, July 2002. [41] Chiara Paviolo, Joana S. Ferreira, Antony Lee, Daniel Hunter, Ivo Calaresu, Somen Nandi, Laurent Groc, and Laurent Cognet. Near-infrared carbon nanotube tracking reveals the nanoscale extracellular space around synapses. Nano Letters , 22(17):6849–6856, September 2022. [42] Juan Esta´ un-Panzano, Yulia Dembitskaya, Ivo Calaresu, Somen Nandi, Quentin Gresil, Evelyne Doudnikoff, Thierry Leste-Lasserre, Thierry Am´ ed´ ee, Laurent Cognet, Laurent Groc, Urs Valentin N¨ agerl, and Erwan Bezard. Nanoscopic mapping of the extracellular space in amyloid plaque-rich cortex. Advanced Science ,13(1):e15674, January 2026. [43] Somen Nandi, Quentin Gresil, Benjamin P. Lambert, Finn L. Sebastian, Simon Settele, Ivo Calaresu, Juan Estaun-Panzano, Anna Lovisotto, Claire Mazzocco, Benjamin S. Flavel, Erwan Bezard, Laurent Groc, Jana Zaumseil, and Laurent Cognet. Ultrashort carbon nanotubes with luminescent color centers are bright nir-ii nanoemitters. ACS Nano , 19(21):19818–19830, June 2025. [44] Alexandru Bacanu, James F. Pelletier, Yoon Jung, and Nikta Fakhri. Inferring scale-dependent non-equilibrium activity using carbon nanotubes. Nature Nanotechnology , 18(8):905–911, August 2023. [45] Srestha Basu, Adi Hendler-Neumark, and Gili Bisker. Dynamic tracking of biological processes using near-infrared fluorescent single-walled carbon nanotubes. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces , 16(41):54960–54975, October 2024. [46] Antony Lee, Apolline A. Simon, Adeline Boyreau, Nathalie Allain-Courtois, Benjamin Lambert, Jean-Philippe Prad` ere, Fr´ ed´ eric Saltel, and Laurent Cognet. Identification of early stage liver fibrosis by modifications in the interstitial space diffusive microenvironment using fluorescent single-walled carbon nanotubes. Nano Letters ,24(18):5603–5609, May 2024. [47] Thomas V. Galassi, Prakrit V. Jena, Janki Shah, Geyou Ao, Elizabeth Molitor, Yaron Bram, Angela Frankel, Jiwoon Park, Jose Jessurun, Daniel S. Ory, Adriana Haimovitz-Friedman, Daniel Roxbury, Jeetain Mittal, Ming Zheng, Robert E. Schwartz, and Daniel A. Heller. An optical nanoreporter of endolysosomal lipid accumulation reveals enduring effects of diet on hepatic macrophages in vivo. Science Translational Medicine ,10(461):eaar2680, October 2018. [48] Nikta Fakhri, Alok D. Wessel, Charlotte Willms, Matteo Pasquali, Dieter R. Klopfenstein, Frederick C. MacKin-tosh, and Christoph F. Schmidt. High-resolution mapping of intracellular fluctuations using carbon nanotubes. 

Science , 344(6187):1031–1035, May 2014. 17 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[49] Saunab Ghosh, Sergei M. Bachilo, Rebecca A. Simonette, Kathleen M. Beckingham, and R. Bruce Weis-man. Oxygen doping modifies near-infrared band gaps in fluorescent single-walled carbon nanotubes. Science ,330(6011):1656–1659, December 2010. [50] Yanmei Piao, Brendan Meany, Lyndsey R. Powell, Nicholas Valley, Hyejin Kwon, George C. Schatz, and YuHuang Wang. Brightening of carbon nanotube photoluminescence through the incorporation of sp3 defects. 

Nature Chemistry , 5(10):840–845, October 2013. [51] Jana Zaumseil. Luminescent defects in single-walled carbon nanotubes for applications. Advanced Optical Materials , 10(2):2101576, 2022. [52] Amit Kumar Mandal, Xiaojian Wu, Joana S. Ferreira, Mijin Kim, Lyndsey R. Powell, Hyejin Kwon, Laurent Groc, YuHuang Wang, and Laurent Cognet. Fluorescent sp3 defect-tailored carbon nanotubes enable nir-ii single particle imaging in live brain slices at ultra-low excitation doses. Scientific Reports , 10(1):5286, March 2020. [53] Oumeng Zhang, Weiyan Zhou, Jin Lu, Tingting Wu, and Matthew D. Lew. Resolving the three-dimensional rotational and translational dynamics of single molecules using radially and azimuthally polarized fluorescence. 

Nano Letters , 22(3):1024–1031, February 2022. [54] R. Guti´ errez-Cuevas, L. A. Alem´ an-Casta˜ neda, I. Herrera, S. Brasselet, and M. A. Alonso. Vectorial phase retrieval in super-resolution polarization microscopy. APL Photonics , 9(2):026106, February 2024. [55] Mikael P. Backlund, Amir Arbabi, Petar N. Petrov, Ehsan Arbabi, Saumya Saurabh, Andrei Faraon, and W. E. Moerner. Removing orientation-induced localization biases in single-molecule microscopy using a broadband metasurface mask. Nature photonics , 10:459–462, 2016. [56] Apolline A. Simon, Lucie Haye, Abdallah Alhalabi, Quentin Gresil, Blanca Mart´ ın Mu˜ noz, St´ ephane Mornet, Andreas Reisch, Xavier Le Gu´ evel, and Laurent Cognet. Expanding the palette of swir emitting nanoparticles based on au nanoclusters for single-particle tracking microscopy. Advanced Science , 11(24):2309267, 2024. [57] Tingting Wu, Peng Lu, Md Ashequr Rahman, Xiao Li, and Matthew D. Lew. Deep-smolm: Deep learning resolves the 3d orientations and 2d positions of overlapping single molecules with optimal nanoscale resolution. 

Optics Express , 30(20):36761–36773, September 2022. [58] Laurent Cognet, Dmitri A. Tsyboulski, John-David R. Rocha, Condell D. Doyle, James M. Tour, and R. Bruce Weisman. Stepwise quenching of exciton fluorescence in carbon nanotubes by single-molecule reactions. Science ,316(5830):1465–1468, June 2007. [59] Francis Perrin. Mouvement brownien d’un ellipsoide - i. dispersion di´ electrique pour des mol´ ecules ellipsoidales. 

Journal de Physique et le Radium , 5(10):497–511, 1934. [60] Sergio R. Aragon and Dina Flamik. High precision transport properties of cylinders by the boundary element method. Macromolecules , 42(16):6290–6299, August 2009. [61] Francis Perrin. Mouvement brownien d’un ellipsoide (ii). rotation libre et d´ epolarisation des fluorescences. translation et diffusion de mol´ ecules ellipsoidales. Journal de Physique et le Radium , 7(1):1–11, 1936. [62] G. Williams. Time-correlation functions and molecular motion. Chemical Society Reviews , 7(1):89, 1978. [63] Amar Singh, Petras J. Kundrotas, and Ilya A. Vakser. Diffusion of proteins in crowded solutions studied by docking-based modeling. The Journal of Chemical Physics , 161(9):095101, September 2024. [64] Carlo Manzo and Maria F Garcia-Parajo. A review of progress in single particle tracking: From methods to biophysical insights. Reports on Progress in Physics , 78(12):124601, December 2015. [65] Xavier Michalet. Mean square displacement analysis of single-particle trajectories with localization error: Brownian motion in an isotropic medium. Physical Review E , 82(4), 2010. [66] Nikta Fakhri, Frederick C. MacKintosh, Brahim Lounis, Laurent Cognet, and Matteo Pasquali. Brownian motion of stiff filaments in a crowded environment. Science , 330(6012):1804–1807, December 2010. 18 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.04.721587 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[67] Zhao Tang, Shannon L. Eichmann, Brahim Lounis, Laurent Cognet, Frederick C. MacKintosh, and Matteo Pasquali. Single-walled carbon nanotube reptation dynamics in submicron sized pores from randomly packed mono-sized colloids. Soft Matter , 18(29):5509–5517, July 2022. [68] Quentin Gresil, Ivo Calaresu, Finn L. Sebastian, Benjamin Flavel, Jana Zaumseil, Laurent Groc, and Laurent Cognet. Scale-dependent emergence of hindered diffusion in the brain extracellular space. https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.18936v1, March 2026. [69] C. Humpel. Organotypic brain slice cultures: A review. Neuroscience , 305:86–98, October 2015. [70] Erkki Ruoslahti. Brain extracellular matrix. Glycobiology , 6(5):489–492, July 1996. [71] Lorraine W. Lau, Rowena Cua, Michael B. Keough, Sarah Haylock-Jacobs, and V. Wee Yong. Pathophysiology of the brain extracellular matrix: A new target for remyelination. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 14(10):722– 729, October 2013. [72] Simon Settele, Florian Stammer, Finn L. Sebastian, Sebastian Lindenthal, Simon R. Wald, Han Li, Benjamin S. Flavel, and Jana Zaumseil. Easy access to bright oxygen defects in biocompatible single-walled carbon nan-otubes via a fenton-like reaction. ACS Nano , 18(31):20667–20678, August 2024. [73] Han Li, Georgy Gordeev, Oisin Garrity, Stephanie Reich, and Benjamin S. Flavel. Separation of small-diameter single-walled carbon nanotubes in one to three steps with aqueous two-phase extraction. ACS Nano , 13(2):2567– 2578, February 2019. 19